
Thermodynamics is a combination of two words, “thermo” and “dynamics”. The word thermo is related to heat while dynamics is related to the motion of particles. Therefore, we define thermodynamics as the branch of heat that deals with the laws of transformation of heat into other forms of energy such as mechanical, chemical and electrical energy and vice versa. Principally it is based on two laws of thermodynamics i.e. the first and second laws of thermodynamics. It is a practical subject that explains the working of heat engines, refrigerators and heat pumps etc. The terms System, Surroundings, Boundary and State Variables are used in thermodynamics with specific meanings.

10.1 THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM
When two objects at different temperatures are brought into contact with each other, energy is transferred from the hotter to the colder object until the bodies reach thermal equilibrium (that is, they are at the same temperature). These observations reveal that heat is energy transferred spontaneously due to a temperature difference. Figure 10.1 shows an example of heat transfer. In fact, since the soft drink and ice are both in contact with the surrounding air and the bench, the ultimate equilibrium temperature will be the same as that of the surroundings. In other words, if two objects are in thermal equilibrium, they have the same temperature.

10.2 Work
Work W is defined as F·Δs. In thermodynamics, work is said to be done by a system when the system as a whole expands. By means of the boundary, the system exerts a force on the surroundings and thereby displaces the surroundings, Figure. (10.4). The sum of all F·Δs over the entire boundary of the system is the work done by a system on its surroundings. Similarly, in the process of contraction of a system, work is done on the system by its surroundings. By convention the work done by a system is considered positive and the work done on the system is taken negative.

10.3 INTERNAL ENERGY
The atoms or molecules of all kinds of matter are in constant motion. Atoms in solids vibrate back and forth in complex motions about their equilibrium positions. Molecules in a liquid wander around among the other molecules, having frequent collisions with them and thus exchanging energy. In gases the molecules travel about at high speeds and have frequent elastic collisions with their neighbors. The sum of the kinetic and potential energies associated with the random motion of the atoms of the substance is the internal energy of the substance. The kinetic energy may be in the form of translational, rotational or vibrational kinetic energy. When we heat a substance, the random motion and the energy associated with it are increased: heat energy is converted into the internal energy of the substance. Similarly, work can be performed on a substance in such a way as to increase the random motion of the atoms. Work energy is converted into the internal energy of the substance. Once heat, work or both are transferred to a substance, they are no longer distinguishable as heat energy and work energy in the substance.

10.4 HEAT, WORK AND INTERNAL ENERGY
Heat, work and internal energy are three mutually distinct concepts. Each one of them is fundamentally related to the temperature of a body and therefore they are closely related to one another. To raise the temperature of some water we “heat” the water by placing the water pot on a flame. Similarly, any object can be raised in temperature (heated) by placing it in thermal contact with another hotter object. The earth is heated by the hot sun without a direct thermal contact. It is evident from the above examples that in the process of raising the temperature (heating) of a body something must have flown from the hotter body to the colder body. This something which flows from the hotter body to the colder body till the temperatures of the two bodies become equal is called heat. Thus heat is energy which is transferred between a substance and its surroundings or between one part of a substance to another as a result of temperature difference only. Heat is energy in transit. It flows till the temperatures of the bodies in thermal contact are equal. Since heat is a form of energy, its SI unit is the joule J. Another common unit of energy often used for heat is the calorie (cal), defined as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by 1.00°C specifically, between 14.5 °C and 15.5 °C , since there is a slight temperature difference. Kilocalorie (kcal) is the energy, needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water by 1.00 °C. Since mass is most often specified in kilograms, the kilocalorie is convenient. Besides supplying heat to a body there is another very general method of raising the temperature (heating) of a body. The method is to perform work on the body. A few examples are as follows:
It is possible to warm up your hands by rubbing them together.
When we hit a nail with a hammer into wood, the nail gets hot.
Similarly when we churn curd in a vessel, the contents are heated.
Pumping up a tire with a hand pump heats up the pump.
In all these examples work is done on a body which warms up without heat supply. The conclusion is that heat and work both can increase the temperature of a body but they are mutually distinct forms of energy. The difference between heat and work is that work can be exchanged between an object and its surroundings by the overall displacement of the object without requiring the difference of temperature whereas transfer of heat energy can be brought about by a temperature difference between two bodies.

10.4.1 Equivalence of Heat and Work
The equivalence between heat and work was established by Count Rumford, James Joule and others. In 1798, Count Rumford, an artillery engineer observed that a great deal of heat was given off in the process of boring a gun metal. He observed that heat could be produced inexhaustibly by friction, i.e. by mechanical work. He showed that the heat liberated was not related with the mass of the metal bored away; but it depends on the work done against friction. This led Rumford to convince that heat is a form of energy. In 1845, Joule carried out experiments to measure very precisely the quantity of heat produced by a certain amount of work (mechanical energy) and observed that there is a definite relationship between the mechanical work done and the heat generated. He showed that when a given amount of work is done, the same amount of heat is always produced, no matter what may be the process of transformation. He showed that work W done, is proportional to the quantity of heat Q. W ∝ Q. W = J Q. Where J is called “Mechanical Equivalent of heat (Joule’s constant) and it is defined as: The ratio of the work done in joules to the heat produced in calories (old unit of heat) is called the mechanical equivalent of heat J. The mechanical equivalent of heat may also be defined as the amount of mechanical energy or work required to produce a unit quantity of heat. The currently accepted value of mechanical equivalent of heat is J = 4.18 joule per calorie. Now if we use the SI units of work and energy, then both, work W and heat Q, are measured in joules then the value of mechanical equivalent of heat is one.

Example 10.1 HEAT ENGINE WORK
A heat engine operates with 65.0 kcal of heat supplied and exhausts 40.0 kcal of heat. How much work did the engine do?
GIVEN: Heat input Q_1 = 65.0 kcal, Heat rejected Q_2 = 40.0 kcal, Mechanical equivalent of heat 1 kcal = 4,184 J. REQUIRED: Work done = W = ?
SOLUTION: The relationship between these quantities is found in equation, W = J (Q_1 - Q_2). Putting values W = 4,184 (J/kcal) (65.0 kcal - 40.0 kcal) = 4,184 (J/ kcal) (25.0 kcal) = 4,184 x 25.0 (J) = 104,600 J = 105 kJ.

10.5 THERMODYNAMIC SYSTEM
A thermodynamic system includes anything whose thermodynamic properties are of interest. It is enclosed in its surroundings or environment; it can exchange heat with, and do work on, its environment through a boundary, which is the imagined wall that separates the system and the environment (Figure 10.2). In reality, the immediate surroundings of the system are interacting with it directly and therefore have a much stronger influence on its behavior and properties. For example, if we are studying a car engine, the burning gasoline inside the cylinder of the engine is the thermodynamic system; the piston, exhaust system, radiator, and air outside form the surroundings of the system. The boundary then consists of the inner surfaces of the cylinder and piston. Any change or a series of changes in a thermodynamic system is called thermodynamic process. We need to define the following technical terms which are essential for the study of thermodynamics.
System: The quantity of matter or region of space whose behavior is being studied is called system. For example a gas enclosed in a cylinder etc.
Surroundings of the system: Everything other than the system in the universe is called the surroundings of the system Figure 10.2.
Boundary of the system: The system is separated from the surroundings by its boundary. In thermodynamics, the exchange of energy between the system and the surroundings can take place through the boundary by the performance of work or the flow of heat. Figure 10.2. There are several kinds of system.
Closed system: The system in which there is no transfer of mass across its boundary is called closed system. In closed system the transfer of heat energy can take place from the system to the surrounding or vice versa. For example hot food in a pressure cooker (Figure 10.3 b).
Open system: The system in which there is a transfer of mass across its boundary is called an open system. In an open system the transfer of heat energy can take place from the system to the surrounding or vice versa for example boiling tea kettle (Figure 10.3 a).
Isolated system: The system in which there is no transfer of mass and heat energy across its boundary is called an isolated system. In an isolated system both mass and energy cannot enter or leave the system across its boundary. Tea contained in a well insulating thermo flask is an example of an isolated system.
Thermodynamic state and thermodynamic state variables: The particular condition when a system has specified values of pressure P, volume V and temperature T etc, is called the state of the system. The variables or functions which determine the physical state of the system are called state variables and state functions of the system. If the system is homogeneous (i.e. it has the same composition every where), then it is usually enough to specify only three parameters, namely, volume, pressure and temperature. The mathematical relationship between these parameters is known as the equation of state of the system. The exact relationship between these parameters is not known for solids, liquids and non-homogeneous substances. In the case of ideal gas, the equation of state is PV = nRT where n is number of moles. P, V and T are respectively the pressure, volume and temperature of the gas and R is the universal gas constant. P, V, T, are state variables. Other examples of the state variables are internal energy U and entropy S.

10.6 REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE PROCESSES
In thermodynamics, a process means a change in the state of a system brought about by a change in the state variables. A process occurs when a system interacts and exchanges energy with its surroundings.
Reversible Process: A process is said to be reversible if it can be retraced exactly in reverse order without producing any change in the surroundings. In the reverse process, the system passes through the same changes as in the direct process through the same states as in the direct process, but the thermal and mechanical effects at each stage are exactly reversed. If heat is absorbed in the direct process, it will be given out in the reverse process. Similarly, if work is done by the system in the direct process, work will be done on the system in the reverse process. In practice, no actual change is exactly reversible. However, very slowly occurring processes can be considered reversible. For example, liquification and evaporation of a substance, performed slowly, are practically reversible. Slow compression of a gas in a cylinder is a reversible process as the compression can be changed into expansion by slowly decreasing the pressure on the piston to reverse the operation.
Irreversible Process: A process which cannot be retraced in the backward direction by reversing the controlling factors is said to be irreversible. All changes which occur suddenly or which involve friction or dissipation of energy through conduction, convection and radiation are irreversible. An example of highly irreversible process is an explosion.
Cyclic Process: A series of processes which bring the system back to the initial state is called a cycle and the process is called a cyclic process. The system which goes through a succession of cyclic process is often called, heat engines.

10.7 FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
The first law of thermodynamics is based on the idea that energy can neither be created nor destroyed in any thermodynamics system. So it is a particular form of the law of conservation of energy, which deals only with the heat energy. This law states that every thermodynamic system possesses a state variable (U) called the internal energy. In any thermodynamic process, when heat energy (ΔQ) is added to a system, this energy appears as an increase in the internal energy (ΔU) stored in the system plus the work done (ΔW) by the system on its surroundings. ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW (10.1). ΔQ is taken positive when heat enters the system and negative when it leaves the system. ΔU is taken positive when temperature of the system rises while it is negative when temperature of the system decreases. It is emphasized that the first law expresses three related ideas in a single mathematical formulation: (1) The existence of an internal energy U as a state variable. (2). The principle of conservation of energy. (3). The definition of heat as energy in transit. The sum of all the kinetic (translational, rotational and vibrational) and potential energies associated with the random motion of the atoms of a substance or system is the internal energy (U) of the substance. According to the first law of thermodynamics ( Eq: 10.1) ΔU = ΔQ - ΔW. It means that the change in the internal energy of a system is equal to the energy flowing in as heat minus the energy flowing out as work. In other words the change in the internal energy of the system is measured by the energy retained by the system. This energy absorbed by the system changes the translational, vibrational and rotational kinetic energy of the molecules. It also changes the potential energy of the molecules due to intermolecular forces. The change in the internal energy of a system depends only upon the initial and final states of the system and not on the path taken between these two states. If the state of a thermodynamics system is changed from state ( A ) to state (B) then the change in internal energy of the system is ΔU = U_B - U_A. Putting this value in equation (10.1) we have U_B - U_A = ΔQ - ΔW. Where (U_A) and (U_B) are the initial and final internal energies of the system. If a system undergoes a cyclic process i.e. it attains its initial state after undergoing a certain process then U_B = U_A. Put this in above equation we get U_B - U_A = ΔQ - ΔW. 0 = ΔQ - ΔW. ΔQ = ΔW (10.2). Thus in cyclic process all the heat energy absorbed by the system is used in doing some useful work by the system.

10.7.1 Applications of the first law thermodynamics
First law of thermodynamics finds many practical applications. They are all based on the principle that using the system the three forms of energy: internal energy; heat; and work can be inter-converted. The system is then often called the working substance. The mathematical formulation of the law ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW suggests the followings processes that can be used for practical applications:
The processes in which any one of the three terms of the equation is zero.
The processes in which any one of the state variables P, V, T, of the system are held constant.
(a) Isochoric Process: The thermodynamics process during which the volume of the system remains constant is called isochoric process. We consider the gas contained in a cylinder having a conducting base and non-conducting walls and with a fixed piston at the end as shown in the Figure (10.5.a). Let heat ΔQ be imparted to the gas. The gas is then heated at constant volume. The pressure of the gas increases from P₁ to P₂ while its temperature increases from T₁ to T₂. Since the system neither expands nor contracts, work is neither done by the system nor on the system i.e ΔW = 0. Using the first law of thermodynamics equation (10.1) we have ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. ΔQ = ΔU (10.3). This means that in an isochoric process the entire amount of heat supplied to the gas is converted to the internal energy of the gas. The pressure and temperature of the gas will increase. On the contrary, removal of heat from a system under isochoric condition will cause an equivalent decrease in the internal energy. The system will cool down and the pressure will fall. The graph of isochoric process is called an “isochor”, which is a straight line, parallel to the pressure axis as shown in the Figure (10.5 b).
(b) Isobaric Process: The thermodynamics process during which the pressure is kept constant is called an isobaric process. Isobaric expansion of a system is often used to convert heat into work. Practically all heat engines depend on the transformation of heat into work. We consider the gas contained in a cylinder having a conducting base and non-conducting walls and frictionless piston of cross-sectional area (A) as shown in the Figure (10.6a). Let V₁, T₁ and P be the volume, temperature and pressure of the gas. When the gas is heated, a certain amount of heat energy ΔQ is transferred into the system. The gas expands and moves the piston outward. If the displacement of the piston is kept very small, the pressure of the gas will not change much and can be considered constant. After expansion the values of temperature and volume of the gas become T₂ and V₂. If the piston moves through a small displacement Δy in the upward direction, the work done by the gas against the environment is ΔW = (Force) (distance). ΔW = F·Δy (i). Where F is the force exerted on the piston during expansion: F = P A. Thus equation (i) becomes ΔW = P A Δy. ΔW = P (V₂ - V₁) = P ΔV. Where V₁ is the initial volume, V₂ is the final volume and ΔV is the increase in volume of the gas. Hence, the work done by the gas which expands at constant pressure is ΔW = P ΔV (10.4). Using the first law of thermodynamics equation (10.1) we have ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. ΔQ = ΔU + P ΔV (10.5). The work performed by the expanding or contracting gas comes from one or both sources: heat supplied to the gas and the internal energy of the gas. The graph of isobaric process is called an “isobar”, which is a straight line, parallel to the volume axis as shown in the Figure (10.6b).
(c) Isothermal Process: The thermodynamics process which is carried out in such a way that a system undergoes changes but its temperature remains constant is called an isothermal process. For sake of simplicity, we shall assume the system contain an ideal gas. The internal energy of an ideal gas does not depend on the volume but depends only on the temperature of the gas. To perform an isothermal process on a gas, we consider the gas to be contained in a cylinder having a conducting base and non-conducting walls and with a movable piston at the end as shown in the Figure. (10.7a). The base of the cylinder is placed on a heat reservoir at temperature T. A reservoir is a body of large heat capacity that maintains the temperature of the gas at T. Let the gas be then allowed to expand slowly by decreasing the pressure on the piston. Due to this expansion, the gas tends to cool down. But heat is conducted from the heat reservoir to the gas so that the temperature of the system remains constant and is equal to the temperature of the reservoir. The whole process from an initial state P₁, V₁, T, to a final State P₂ , V₂, T, is represented by a continuous curve which is called an “isotherm” as shown in the Figure (10.7.b). During isothermal expansion some work ΔW is done by the gas in pushing up the piston in the cylinder. Since the temperature remains constant, there is no change in the internal energy of the gas, that is, ΔU = 0. According to the first law of thermodynamics, ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. ΔQ = 0 + ΔW. ΔQ = ΔW. This shows that if the gas expands and does external work, an equal amount of heat has to be supplied in order to maintain its temperature constant. Conversely, if the gas contracts, work is being done on it and equal amount of heat has to be allowed to leave the gas.
(d) Adiabatic Process: The thermodynamics process during which no heat enters or leaves a system is called an adiabatic process. For every adiabatic process ΔQ = 0. A truly adiabatic process is an ideal one which cannot be realized. However, the flow of heat may be prevented either by surrounding the system with a thick layer of heating insulating material such as cork, asbestos, or by performing the process very quickly. The flow of heat requires finite time, so any process performed quickly enough will be practically adiabatic. Figure 10.8. To perform an adiabatic process on a gas, we consider the gas to be contained in a completely insulated cylinder with a movable piston at the end as shown in the Figure.(10.8.a). Since no heat energy can enter or leave the system during an expansion or compression therefore ΔQ = 0. If the gas is allowed to expand suddenly decreasing the pressure on the piston, the gas will be cooled, so that its temperature will decrease. Therefore the internal energy of the gas will decrease. Similarly if the gas is compressed by suddenly increasing the pressure on the piston, the gas will be heated, so that temperature will increase. Therefore the internal energy of the gas will increase. According to the first law of thermodynamics ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. 0 = ΔU + ΔW. or ΔU = - ΔW. Thus an increase in the internal energy of the system in an adiabatic process is equal to the work done on the system. We can write the above equation as ΔW = - ΔU (10.6). This means that if the system does the work, then in adiabatic process, the work is done at the cost of internal energy. The curve shown in Figure.(10.8b) is the graphic representation of an adiabatic expansion of an ideal gas. Such a curve is known as “adiabat”.

Example 10.2 INTERNAL ENERGY
In a certain process, 400 J of heat energy is supplied to a system and at the same time 150 J of work is done by the system. What is the increase in internal energy of the system?
GIVEN: Heat energy supplied to the system, ΔQ = 400 J, Work done by the system, ΔW = 150 J. REQUIRED: increase in internal energy of the system ΔU = ?
SOLUTION: Using the first law of thermodynamics ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. ΔU = ΔQ - ΔW. ΔU = 400 J - 150 J = 250 J.

Assignment 1:
An ideal gas absorbs 5.00 x 10³ J of energy while doing 2.00 x 10³ J of work on the environment during a constant pressure process. (a) Compute the change in the internal energy of the gas. (b) If the internal energy now drops by 4.50 x 10³ J and 7.50 x 10³ is expelled from the system, find the change in volume, assuming a constant pressure process at 1.01 x 10⁵ Pa. (3.00 x 10³ J, -2.97 x 10⁻² m³)

10.8 MOLAR SPECIFIC HEAT OF A GAS
Specific heat of a body is defined as the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kg of the substance by 1 K. The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of one mole of gas by 1 K is called molar specific heat or molar specific heat capacity of that gas. If ΔQ is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of n moles of a substance by ΔT then ΔQ ∝ n ΔT. ΔQ = C_m n ΔT (10.7). where, C_m is a constant of proportionality and is known as molar specific heat or molar specific heat capacity. The SI unit of molar specific heat or molar specific heat capacity is joule per mole per Kelvin which is expressed as J mol⁻¹ K⁻¹. The temperature of a gas may be changed under variety of conditions. The volume may be kept constant or the pressure may be kept constant or both may be varied in some definite manner. Thus for a gas two specific heats are defined. The molar specific heat at constant volume C_v and the molar specific heat at constant pressure C_p.

10.8.1 Constant volume molar specific heat of a gas C_v
The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one mole of a gas by 1 K while keeping its volume constant is called the constant volume molar specific heat C_v of that gas. Consider n moles of an ideal gas which is confined in a cylinder fitted with a fixed piston as shown in the Figure. 10.9. When the gas is heated, its volume remains constant. All the heat supplied goes to increase the kinetic energy of the molecules due to which the temperature of the gas increases. If ΔQ_v is the amount of heat supplied to n moles of a ideal gas and ΔT is the rise in temperature, then by the definition of the molar specific heat we have ΔQ_v = n C_v ΔT (10.8). Where C_v is the molar specific of a gas at constant volume.

10.8.2 Constant pressure molar specific heat of a gas C_p
The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one mole of a gas by 1 K while keeping its pressure constant is called the constant pressure molar specific heat C_p of that gas. Consider n moles of an ideal gas which is confined in a cylinder fitted with a movable piston as shown in the Figure.10.10. When the gas is heated in this way its temperature rises and at the same time it expands by pushing the piston upward against the constant external pressure. The gas does work on piston. If ΔQ_p is the amount of heat supplied to n moles of a ideal gas and ΔT is the rise in temperature, then by the definition of the molar specific heat we have ΔQ_p = n C_p ΔT (10.9). Where C_p is the molar specific of a gas at constant pressure.

10.8.3 Relation between molar specific heat at constant pressure and molar specific heat at constant volume.
When gas is heated at constant volume, there is no work done by the gas against the surroundings. The heat received is converted entirely into the internal energy, in the form of molecular kinetic energy. When the gas is heated at constant pressure, the gas will expand on being heated. It does work against the atmosphere. Hence heat must be supplied to change the internal energy of the gas and to perform external work. Since the change of internal energy is the same in both cases, the specific heat at constant pressure C_p is greater than the specific heat at constant volume C_v i.e C_p > C_v because external work is also performed when the gas expands at constant pressure. If ΔQ_v is the amount of heat supplied and ΔT is the rise in temperature, then by the definition of the constant volume molar specific heat we have ΔQ_v = n C_v ΔT. The pressure of the gas increases during the process, but no work is done, because the volume is kept constant. ΔW_v = 0. From the first law of thermodynamics: ΔQ_v = ΔU + ΔW_v. ΔQ_v = ΔU + 0. ΔQ_v = ΔU (i). Compare equation (10.8) and equation (i) we get ΔU = n C_v ΔT (ii). If ΔQ_p is the heat supplied and ΔT is the rise in temperature, then ΔQ_p = n C_p ΔT (iii). The work done by the gas against the constant external pressure is given by ΔW_p = Force x distance. ΔW_p = F Δy. ΔW_p = P A Δy = P ΔV. For an ideal gas, the general gas equation is P ΔV = n R ΔT. Therefore ΔW_p = P ΔV = n R ΔT (iv). From first law of thermodynamics ΔQ_p = ΔU + ΔW_p (v). Substitute the expressions for ΔQ_p, ΔU and ΔW_p from equation (10.9), (ii), and (iv) respectively in the Equation (v) we get n C_p ΔT = n C_v ΔT + n R ΔT. On simplifying, we get C_p - C_v = R (10.10). Where R is the universal gas constant and its value is R = 8.315 J mol⁻¹ K⁻¹.

Example 10.3 INTERNAL ENERGY OF THE NITROGEN GAS
What is the change in internal energy of 200 g of nitrogen as it is heated from 10 °C to 30°C at constant volume? (For nitrogen gas C_v = 20.815 J mole⁻¹ K⁻¹).
GIVEN: Mass of nitrogen gas m = 200 g, Initial temperature of nitrogen gas T₁ = 10°C, Final temperature of nitrogen gas T₂ = 30°C, Change in temperature ΔT = T₂ - T₁ = 30°C - 10°C = 20°C = 20 K. REQUIRED: Change in internal energy ΔU = ?
SOLUTION: Molecular mass of nitrogen gas M = 28 g per mole. Number of moles, n = m / M = 200 g / 28 g per mole = 7.143 mole. The heat added is converted entirely into the internal energy of the nitrogen gas. ΔU = n C_v ΔT. ΔU = 7.143 mole x 20.815 J mole⁻¹ K⁻¹ x 20 K = 2973.6 J.

10.9 HEAT ENGINE
A heat engine is a device that converts heat energy into mechanical work. Steam engine, petrol engine and diesel engine, are all the examples of heat engines. A heat engine consists of the following parts:
Heat Source or heat reservoir: It is a very large reservoir or source of heat energy, and is at a higher temperature T₁. Its temperature remains practically unchanged during any transfer of heat into or out of it. It is also called high temperature reservoir (HTR).
Heat Sink or cold reservoir: It is a very large body or reservoir at a lower temperature T₂. Its temperature remains practically constant during any transfer of heat into or out of it. It is also called low temperature reservoir (LTR).
Working Substance: Normally gas is used as a working substance for a heat engine. In principle, a heat engine is a device through which a working substance is taken through a cyclic process. The process is performed in such a way that some heat Q₁ is absorbed from a high temperature reservoir (HTR or source) at temperature T₁ maximum work W is done on the surroundings and heat Q₂ is rejected to a low temperature reservoir (LTR or sink) at temperature T₂. As shown in the Figure 10.12. Consider a heat engine that operates in a cycle. Therefore, after completing one cycle the internal energy of the system reaches its original value. So the net change in internal energy is zero for a complete cycle i.e ΔU = 0. Now using first law of thermodynamics we have ΔQ = ΔU + ΔW. ΔQ = 0 + ΔW. ΔW = ΔQ. Let Q₁ be the heat energy absorbed by heat engine from a high temperature reservoir and Q₂ be the heat energy rejected by the engine to low temperature reservoir then for one complete cycle the work done by the engine is ΔW = ΔQ. ΔW = Q₁ - Q₂ (10.11). The thermal efficiency η of a heat engine is defined as the ratio of the net work W done by the engine in each cycle to the heat Q₁ absorbed in each cycle. Thermal efficiency = Work done by the engine / Heat absorbed by the engine. η = ΔW / Q₁ (10.12). Put the value of ΔW from equation 10.11, we have η = (Q₁ - Q₂) / Q₁. η = 1 - (Q₂ / Q₁) (10.13). If Q₂ = 0 i.e. no heat were exhausted by the engine so that all the heat Q₁ absorbed were converted to work. η = 1 - (0 / Q₁) = 1 - 0 = 1. η = 1 x 100 = 100 %. Experiments show that it is impossible to construct a 100 % efficient heat engine. In the operation of a heat engine, such as steam engine, gasoline engine or diesel engine some heat Q₂ must be rejected to heat sink (LTR). We can state this fact as follows: It is impossible to construct a heat engine which will produce no effect other than the extraction of heat from a reservoir and the performance of an equal amount of work. This statement is, in fact, one form of the statements of the second law of thermodynamics.

Example 10.4 HEAT ENGINE
A reversible engine works between two temperatures whose difference is 100 °C. If it absorbs 746 J of heat from the source and rejects 546 J to the sink, calculate the temperature of the source and the sink.
GIVEN: Difference between temperatures, T₁ - T₂ = 100°C = 100 K, Heat absorbed, Q₁ = 746 J, Heat rejected, Q₂ = 546 J. REQUIRED: Temperature of the source = T₁ = ?, Temperature of the sink = T₂ = ?
SOLUTION: The efficiency of a reversible heat engine is given by the formula: η = (Q₁ - Q₂) / Q₁ = (T₁ - T₂) / T₁. Substitute the given values in the above equation, we get: (746 J - 546 J) / 746 J = 100 K / T₁. 200 J / 746 J = 100 K / T₁. T₁ = (746 J x 100 K) / 200 J = 373 K = 100 °C. Since, T₁ - T₂ = 100°C. T₂ = T₁ - 100°C = 100°C - 100°C = 0°C. T₁ = 100 °C & T₂ = 0°C.

Assignment 2: THE EFFICIENCY OF AN ENGINE
During one cycle, an engine extracts 2.00 x 10³ J of energy from a hot reservoir and transfers 1.50 x 10³ J to a cold reservoir. (a) Find the thermal efficiency of the engine. (b) How much work does this engine do in one cycle? (c) What average power does the engine generate if it goes through four cycles in 2.50 s? (0.250, or 25.0%, 5.00 x 10² J, 8.00 x 10² W)

10.10 SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
The first law of thermodynamics is a generalization of the law of conservation of energy. It tells us that heat and mechanical work are mutually interconvertible. But the second law of thermodynamics tells us how heat energy can be converted into