
The idea of a wave is useful for dealing with a wide range of phenomena, and is one of the basic concepts of physics. Knowledge of wave behavior is also important to engineers. A progressive wave consists of a disturbance of some kind moving from the source to the surrounding places as a result of which energy is transmitted from one point to another point. Therefore, one can also say that the mechanism by which energy is transferred from one point to another point is called wave motion.
There are different types of waves around us, some of these waves require a medium for their propagation, for example sound waves move in the air, water waves and waves set up in a string or spring. Such waves are called mechanical Waves. There are some other type of waves which do not require any medium for their motion such as heat, light and radio waves. These types of waves are known as electromagnetic waves.

8.1 Periodic Waves
Continuous periodic waves can be produced by a source oscillating periodically in a medium. As the source oscillates, it disturbs the particles of the medium and set them to vibrate with same amplitude and frequency, causing wave motion.
i. A good example of periodic vibrating source can be provided by considering an ordinary rope whose one end is fastened to fixed support and the other end is free as shown in Figure (8.1). If we give a sudden up and down motion at the free end periodically, a train of transverse waves will be produced, moving down the rope. Each portion of the rope moves up and down periodically.
ii. A more effective demonstration of a periodic oscillating source is provided by an electromagnetic vibrator. When the frequency of the vibrator is increased then transverse pulses are produced in the string. These waves move down the cord from the vibrator to the clamped end as shown in Figure 8.2.
iii. Similarly circular periodic waves can be generated in a ripple tank when spherical dippers just touching the water surface. This is done by means of a mechanical arrangement driven by a small electric motor. The rate of dipping the rods is controlled by changing the speed of motor. The pattern of waves obtained at any instant of time is shown in Figure 8.3.
iv. An oscillating mass - spring system also provides a good example of a periodic vibrator. A pen attached to the mass will trace out a wavy line on the paper which is moved at constant rate. Recall unit 7.

8.2 Progressive Waves
Many vibrating objects act as sources for the generation of waves. When an object vibrates, it does work on the particles of the medium and imparts energy, due to which the particles of the medium start vibration. As a result, energy is transmitted from one point to another point. Sound waves can originate from a vibrating tuning fork in a laboratory. Similarly sound waves are produced by vibrating a string of a guitar. In this way mechanical progressive waves can be produced, as shown in Fig (8.4). Consider an ordinary rope whose one end is attached to a rigid support by giving sudden up and down motion at the free end, a wave is set up at the free end and moves along the string with same speed v. If the up and down motion of the hand is continued, a series of waves will travel along the string. We can also demonstrate the generation of waves when a pebble is dropped into quiet pool of water. A disturbance is produced at point of impact and spreads out in all directions on the surface of water with constant speed.

8.2.1 Motion of a wave
To understand how a wave moves along a vibrating cord, consider the Fig (8.6) in which a wave is moving towards the left along a stretched string when the end point "A" of the string makes a complete vibration.
i. At the time t = 0 the end “A” of the string is at the mean position while point “B” on the string is at a crest or highest point.
ii. After time t = T/4 the point "A" is at the trough while "B" is at the equilibrium position. During the same time the crest of the wave has moved to the right.
iii. After time t = T/2 the point "A" passes through the equilibrium position while "B" is at the trough and the crest of the wave is further moved to the right.
iv. At time t = 3T/4 the point "A" is at the crest while "B" is at the mean position and the crest is further moved.
v. After time period "T" both the points "A" and "B" has completed exactly one oscillation and the crest moves through a distance equal to Wavelength.
This also shows that the particles of the medium oscillates with the same frequency when a wave passes through them. It should be noted that in the entire disturbance no particle has moved far from its initial position. Only the disturbance moves through the cord. This behavior is the characteristic of all the wave motion.

Necessary Conditions for Wave Motion
Since the propagation of waves occurs by the interaction of the particles of the medium, so the following conditions are necessary for the propagation of waves.
i. The medium must be elastic.
ii. The particles of the medium should not be independent of each other, so that to exert force on each other. Transverse and longitudinal waves can be set up in solid. In fluids however transverse wave die out very quickly and usually can not be produced.

8.3 Classification of Progressive Waves
Those waves which transmit energy from one place to another place are called progressive or traveling waves. Progressive waves are classified into two types (a) Transverse waves (b) Longitudinal waves.

8.3.1 Transverse Waves
Those waves in which the particles of the medium vibrate along a line perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the waves are known as transverse waves. Whenever a disturbance is propagating through a medium the particles of the medium are disturbed and start vibration. If the vibration of the particle is perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of the wave then it is called transverse wave pulse. In transverse wave the particles vibrate with the period and frequency of the source.
i. Wave Crest: The portion of a wave above the mean level is called a wave crest.
ii. Wave Trough: The portion of a wave below the mean level is known as a wave trough.
Examples: Consider a string whose one end is attached to a strong support and the other end is free. If the free end is moved up and down periodically, a series of transverse waves is produced as shown is Figure 8.7. Here each particle of the cord is vibrating perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave.
Similarly when a pebble is dropped in to quiet pond, a circular pattern spreads out form the point of impact. This pattern is that of water waves and we can see that waves are moving on the surface of water. To investigate whether the water molecules on the surface moves, when a wave is passing over it, we can drop a piece of paper on the surface of water and watch its motion. The piece of cork does not move along with the wave. Such waves in which the particles of the medium vibrate along a line at right angle to the direction of the propagation of waves are known as transverse waves. Thus water waves are transverse waves. Light waves, radio, television and mobile phone signals are also the examples of transverse waves. They are electromagnetic waves and can travel through vacuum. Mechanical waves can be set up in solids and on the surface of liquids, where the particles of the medium are close enough and exert large force on one another. However in gases the molecules are too far from one another and act independently, so mechanical transverse waves cannot propagate through gases.

8.3.2 LONGITUDINAL OR COMPRESSIONAL WAVES
Longitudinal waves consist of compressions and rarefactions. The portion of the medium where the particles are over crowded is called compression while the portion of the medium where its particles are least over crowded, is known as rarefaction. Those waves in which the particles of the medium vibrate about their mean position along the direction of propagation of the waves are called longitudinal or compressional waves. To demonstrate the longitudinal waves, an interesting experiment can be done with a slightly stretched slinky spring placed on a smooth table top and tied at one end and the other end is free. When the free end of the spring is pushed forward the loops near the end at which the compression force is applied are compressed before the rest of the spring experiences the disturbance. The compressed loops then exert a force on the loops to the right of them and in this way compressional pulse travels along the spring. When the spring is suddenly pulled backward the loops near the end at which the force is applied are rarefacted, before the rest of the spring experiences the disturbance. The rarefacted loops then exert a force on the loops to the right of them and a rarefaction travels along the spring. If the spring is pushed forward and backward at a constant rate, a series of longitudinal waves is set up.
Other example of longitudinal waves are sound waves and shock waves produced during an earthquake which are also called seismic waves Figure 8.10.

8.3.3 Characteristics of Wave
A wave is specified by the following parameters; wave speed, frequency, time period, phase, wavelength, amplitude and intensity.
i. Wave Speed: The speed of a wave is defined as the distance traveled by a wave per unit time. The speed of a wave depends upon the type of wave as well as the properties of the medium. For example the speed of a transverse wave pulse in an elastic stretched string or spring is given by v = √(T/μ) (8.1). Thus the speed of transverse wave in a well stretched and thin string is greater as compared to a loosely and thick one. The speed of a compressional or longitudinal wave depends upon the modulus of elasticity E and density ρ of the medium, which is given by v = √(E/ρ) (8.3). Hence longitudinal waves travel more slowly in gases than in solids because gases are more compressible and hence having a smaller elastic modulus E.
ii. Frequency of Waves: The number of waves passing through a certain point in unit time is called frequency of the wave. As a wave progresses, each particle of the medium oscillates periodically with the frequency and period of the source. So the frequency ‘f’ of the wave is equal to the frequency of the simple harmonic oscillating source. Frequency = Number of waves passing through a point / Time taken by waves.
iii. Time Period of Wave: When a wave progresses through a medium, its particles are set into vibration with the period of oscillating source. So the period of the wave is equal to the period of the simple harmonic oscillator. The time during which a wave passes through a certain point is called the time period of the wave. It is equal to the reciprocal of the frequency. T = 1/f.
iv. Wavelength λ: The distance between the two successive particles which are exactly in the same state of vibration is called wavelength indicated by ‘λ’. In the Figure 8.11, the point “A” and "C" or “P” and “Q” or "B" and "D” are in the same phase, because they are in the same state of vibration. A very important relation exists between wavelength and frequency. One wavelength of a wave is sent out by the wave generating source as it completes one vibration. The time for 1 vibration is called time period T. The wave covers distance λ in time period T and we find the speed v of the wave as v = distance covered / time taken. Here v = λ/T => v = f λ. This relation is true for all waves.
v. Amplitude of Wave: The maximum displacement covered by a vibrating particle from its equilibrium position on either side is called amplitude indicated by y₀.
vi. Intensity of Wave: The amount of energy transmitted per second per unit area placed perpendicular to the direction of propagation of waves is called intensity of the waves indicated by I.

Example 8.1 A WAVE GENERATOR
A wave generator produces 500 pulses in 10 s. Find the period and frequency of the pulses it produces.
Number of pulses produced = 500 pulses, Time taken = 10 s.
(a) Time period = T = ? (b) Frequency = f = ?
Solution:
(a) The time period of the wave is T = 10 s / 500 = 0.02 s.
(b) The frequency f = 1/T = 1/0.02 = 50 pulses s⁻¹.

Example 8.2 RIPPLE TANK
In a ripple tank 40 waves passes through a certain point in one second. If the wavelength of the waves is 5 cm, then find the speed of the waves.
Frequency of the waves = f = 40 waves s⁻¹, Wavelength = λ = 5 cm. Required: Speed of waves = v = ?
Solution: Formula v = f λ. v = 40 waves s⁻¹ x 5 cm = 200 cm s⁻¹.

8.4 SPEED OF SOUND
The distance covered by sound wave per unit time is called speed of sound wave. Sound waves are compressional waves in nature. The speed of mechanical wave in a medium depends upon the two characteristic of the medium.
i. Density of the medium.
ii. Elasticity of the medium.
An expression for the speed of sound in any medium was derived by Newton and may be written as speed = √(Elastic modulus of medium E / density of the medium ρ). Newton assumed that the sound travels through air and other gases under isothermal conditions, which means that when sound waves travel in the air there is no change in temperature. Under such condition the modulus of elasticity is equal to the pressure of the gas, which can be proved as.
Let "V" be the volume of the air at pressure "P". If we increase the pressure from "P" to P + ΔP and volume is decreased from "V" to V - ΔV keeping temperature constant. Then applying Boyle's law we have. PV = (P + ΔP) (V - ΔV). P ΔV = ΔP V - ΔP ΔV. If the increase in pressure is small then the decrease in volume is also small, so neglecting the term ΔP ΔV. Therefore P ΔV = ΔP V (ii). P = Stress / Volumetric Strain. Where E is known as modulus of elasticity for isothermal process, so the speed of sound in the air or gas is v = √(E/ρ) (8.6). Where P is the pressure and ρ is the density of the gas. This is Newton's formula for the speed of sound in the air. Since P = ρ_m g h. v = √(ρ_m g h / ρ) (8.7). Where ρ_m is density of mercury at S.T.P ρ_m = 13.6 g cm⁻³, g = 980 cm s⁻². And density of air = ρ = 0.001293 g cm⁻³. So v = √(13.6 x 980 x 76 / 0.001293) = 281 m s⁻¹. The experimental value of speed of sound in gas is 332 m s⁻¹. Thus the theoretical value is 16% less than the experimental value.

8.4.1 Laplace’s Correction
A French mathematician Laplace explained the discrepancy in theoretical and experimental values of the speed of sound in gas. Laplace argued that sound waves are longitudinal waves which consist of compressions and rarefactions. At a compression the temperature of air rises (due to increase of pressure) and at a rarefaction cooling effect is produced, so temperature of the gas does not remain constant hence Boyle's Law is not applicable. Laplace also said that air is a very poor conductor of heat and sound waves travel through it with a great speed (330 m s⁻¹). During compression air can not lose heat and can not gain heat during rarefaction. So the propagation of sound waves through air or gas is an adiabatic process. The rapid changes in the air pressure, volume and temperature takes place under adiabatic conditions. Considering this an adiabatic process for which we have P V^γ = Constant (8.8). Where P is the pressure, V is the volume of the gas and γ is a constant, depending on the nature of the gas. Now if the pressure is increased from P to P + ΔP and volume is decreased from V to V - ΔV then we have P V^γ = (P + ΔP)(V - ΔV)^γ = (P + ΔP) V^γ (1 - γ ΔV/V). Applying Binomial theorem and neglecting square and higher power terms of ΔV/V, we have P = (P + ΔP) (1 - γ ΔV/V). Neglecting the term (ΔP ΔV)/V. P = P - γ P ΔV/V + ΔP. γ P ΔV/V = ΔP. γ P = ΔP / (ΔV/V) = Stress / Volumetric strain. γ P = E = modulus of elasticity for adiabatic process. The speed of sound in the air or gas becomes v = √(γ P / ρ) (8.9). or v = √(γ ρ_m g h / ρ) (8.10). v = √(1.42 x 13.6 x 980 x 76 / 0.001293) = 33310 cm s⁻¹ = 333 m s⁻¹. This value of speed of sound agrees with the experimental value 332 m s⁻¹ within reasonable limits. Therefore Laplace correction must be correct.

8.4.2 Effects of Various Factors on speed of Sound in air
Sound waves are compressional mechanical waves propagating in gas or air with a speed v = √(γ P / ρ). The following factors affect the speed of sound in a gas.
1. Density: The speed of sound in a gas varies inversely as the square root of the density of the gas.
2. Moisture: The presence of moisture in the air reduces the resultant density of air. The net result is that the speed of sound increases with humidity. Hence the velocity of sound in damp air is greater than its value in dry air.
3. Pressure: For one mole of an ideal gas having volume V and pressure P at temperature T, we can write PV = RT. ρ = m / V (8.11). Where R is a general gas constant. If m is the mass of the gas then its density is ρ = m / V. or ρ = P m / (R T) (8.12). Therefore the speed of sound is v = √(γ P / ρ) = √(γ R T / m) (8.13). Hence the speed of sound in a gas is independent of its pressure.
4. Temperature: For solids and liquids the change in the speed of sound with temperature is very small and can be neglected. But for gases the change in speed of sound with temperature is very large. The increase in speed of sound with temperature in gas is about 0.6 m s⁻¹ for each 1° rise in temperature. Since the speed of sound in a gas is v = √(γ R T / m). Therefore, v ∝ √T. That is the speed of sound in a gas is directly proportional to the square root of the absolute temperature of the gas. If v₀ and v are the speeds of sound at temperatures T₀ and T respectively then we can write v / v₀ = √(T / T₀) (8.14). As T₀ = (0°C + 273) K and T = (t°C + 273) K. v / v₀ = √(T / T₀) = √((t + 273) / 273) = √(1 + t/273) (i). Applying Binomial theorem and neglecting higher power terms we get v = v₀ (1 + t/546) (ii). v = v₀ + (v₀ t)/546 (8.15). Since at 0°C v₀ = 332 m s⁻¹. v = v₀ + (332 t)/546. v = v₀ + 0.61 t°C (8.16). v₀ = v - 0.61 t°C. Thus the increase in the speed of sound for each degree rise above 0 °C is 0.61 m s⁻¹.
5. Wind: If the air carrying sound waves, is itself moving i.e. there is wind, the speed of sound in the direction of wind relative to the ground is (v + v_w) while against the wind is (v - v_w), where v_w is the speed of wind and v is the speed of sound.

Example 8.3 STEEL RAILWAY TRACK
Find the speed of sound in a steel railway track, if the density of steel is 7800 kg m⁻³ and Elastic modulus is 2.0 x 10¹¹ N m⁻².
Density of steel = ρ = 7800 kg m⁻³, Elastic modulus = E = 2.0 x 10¹¹ N m⁻². Required: speed of sound = v = ?
Solution: Formula for Speed of sound = v = √(E/ρ). v = √(2.0 x 10¹¹ N m⁻² / 7800 kg m⁻³) = 5.06 x 10³ m s⁻¹.

Assignment 8.1
Compute the speed of sound in sea water, if its density is 1025 kg m⁻³ and Elastic modulus is 2.1 x 10⁹ N m⁻². (1430 m s⁻¹)

Example 8.4 NEON GAS
Find the speed of sound in a Neon gas at 0 °C (m = 29 g/mol and γ for mono-atomic gas = 1.66).
Temperature of Neon gas T = 0 °C, mass of the gas m = 29 g/mol, nature of the gas γ = 1.66. Required: speed of sound = ?
Solution: The speed of sound in gas is v = √(γ R T / m). v = √(1.66 x 8.314 J K⁻¹ mol⁻¹ x 273 K / 0.029 kg mol⁻¹) = 432 m s⁻¹.

8.5 SUPERPOSITION OF WAVES
What happens when waves meet? Is their motion changed when colliding with solid objects? The answer to these questions may be obtained by producing pulses on a long narrow spring, as shown in the Figure 8.12 two transverse pulses on a spring are approaching each other. When they cross, the pulses superpose and resultant displacement of the spring is equal to the sum of the displacements which each pulse has caused at that point. When they cross, the pulses superpose and resultant displacement of the spring is equal to the sum of the displacements which each pulse has caused at that point. After crossing, each pulse travels along the spring as nothing had happened and it has its original shape and speed. Figure 8.12 shows the superposition of two equal and opposite pulses. In this case when the pulses meet, they cancel the effect of each other and the net displacement of the spring is zero. In general we can conclude that the waves unlike particles, pass through each other unaffected and the principle of superposition is defined as: When two or more waves are passing through the same region at the same time, the total displacement at the point where they interact, is equal to the vector sum of the individual displacement due to each pulse at that point. Thus, if a particle of a medium is simultaneously acted upon by n number of waves, such that its displacement due to each of the individual waves is y₁, y₂, y₃, ..., y_n then the resultant displacement y of the particle is y = y₁ + y₂ + y₃ + ... + y_n (8.17). This is known as the principle of superposition of waves.

8.6 INTERFERENCE OF WAVES
The effect produced by the superposition of waves from two coherent sources, passing through the same region is known as interference. The two sources are said to be coherent if the phase difference between the sources is constant. In a region where wave trains from coherent sources meet, superposition occurs, giving reinforcement of the waves at some points and cancellation at the others. The resulting effect is called an interference pattern. Coherent sources have a constant phase difference which means that they must have the same frequency and amplitude. Interference is of two types.
i. Constructive Interference: When two waves arrive at the same place at the same time in phase then they reinforce each other and constructive interference occurs. The resultant displacement at point of superposition is equal to the vector sum of the individual displacement due to each wave at that point. Hence in case of transverse waves constructive interference takes place when crest of one wave meets with the crest of the other wave while trough of one wave meet with trough of the other. In case of longitudinal waves constructive interference occurs when compression of one wave meets with compression of the other wave and rarefaction of one wave with rarefaction of the other.
ii. Destructive Interference: If two waves arrive at the same place at the same time but are out of phase (180°), then destructive interference takes place. The amplitude of the resultant wave is equal to the difference between the amplitudes of the individual waves. y = y₁ - y₂ (1). Destructive interference occurs when crest of one wave meets with trough of the other wave. In case of sound waves (compressional waves) destructive interference takes place when compression of one wave meets with rarefaction of the other wave.

8.6.1 Conditions for Interference
From the above discussion we conclude that the following conditions are necessary for constructive and destructive interference.
1. The two waves must be phase coherent.
2. They must arrive at the same place at the same time.
3. The two waves must be traveling in the same direction.
4. The principle of linear superposition must be satisfied.
(a) For constructive interference the waves must be in phase. The path difference between the waves must be either zero or integral multiple of wavelength λ. d = 0, λ, 2λ, 3λ, ... d = m λ.
(b) For destructive interference the two waves must be out of phase (180°) and the path difference is d = (m + ½) λ. Where m = 0, 1, 2, ...

8.7 INTERFERENCE OF SOUND WAVES
The effect produced by the superposition of sound waves from two coherent sources, passing through the same region is known as interference of sound waves. When two coherent waves arrive at the same place at the same time, they reinforce each other and interference takes place.
Activity: The interference of sound waves can be demonstrated with the apparatus as shown in Fig 8.16. A vibrating tuning fork is held above the tube. The sound waves entering the tube splits into two parts. Half the intensity goes through the path ACB to the point B and the remaining half through the path ADB to the point B. The two parts of sound waves re-unite at outlet B, which can be detected by detector such as ear. If the path ACB and ADB are equal, the two waves arrive at B are in phase and constructive interference takes place. As a result loud sound is heard. Now if the sliding tube is drawn out and the path ADB becomes longer than the path ACB, then the sound waves arriving at B via D will be different coming from via C. When the path difference between the waves is half a wavelength (λ/2), they interfere destructively and as a result no sound is heard at B. If the rubber portion of tube is pinched at C, so as to stop the sound waves through C, then the ear will again hear the sound. This proves that the silence is due to destructive interference of the two sound waves.

8.8 BEATS
We have discussed the interference produced by the superposition of two sound waves of the same frequency. Now question arises that what is the effect of the superposition of two sound waves of slightly different frequencies? The answer is that a stationary observer would detect a fluctuation in the loudness of the combined sounds. The sound is loud, then faint, then loud, then faint and so on. This periodic vibration in the loudness of sound which is heard when two notes of nearly the same frequency are played simultaneously, is called beats. Generally when two sound sources of slightly difference frequency are sounded at the same time, we will hear a single note which rises and falls in intensity. To study how beats are produced, take two audio-frequency generators say tuning forks of frequency 256 Hz. Slightly load the prong of fork B with a little wax, so that its frequency becomes 254 Hz. The two tuning forks are now placed at equal distance from the ear and sounded simultaneously. Suppose at the time t₁ = 0, both the forks are in phase and sending compressions, indicated by the rightward pointing arrows, as shown in Figure 8.17 (a). The two compressions will arrive at the ear together and interfere constructively, due to which loud sound is heard. As the time goes on, the fork B vibrates with a slightly lower frequency than A, so it will begin to fall behind. After time t₂ = 1/4 seconds fork A will complete 64 vibrations and will just sending compression. The fork B will complete 63.5 vibrations and will sending out a rarefaction as shown in Fig 8.17 (b). The compression and rarefaction at the ear will cancel each other and no sound is heard. As the time passes the tuning fork B falls behind the fork A. After time t₃ = 1/2 second both the forks will be sending compressions together and thus again loud sound will be heard. After time t₄ = 3/4 second the fork A will sending compression while fork 'B' will send the rarefaction. When a compression from A and rarefaction from B reach the ear at the same time, they will cancel each other and no sound is heard. After t₅ = 1 second fork A will complete 256 vibration, while B will complete 254 vibrations and both will just sending compressions, so again loud sound is heard by the ear. Thus in one second two beats are produced while the difference in frequencies of the forks is also two. Therefore we can conclude that the number of beats per second is equal to the difference between the frequencies of the two forks. N = |f₁ - f₂| (8.18). We can understand the phenomenon of beats by considering the displacement curves of the sound waves produced by the two tuning forks. The displacements of the particles of the medium due to two waves are plotted separately as a function of time, as shown in Figure (8.18). If both the waves travel simultaneously along the same line, then according to the principle of superposition, displacement of any particle will be the vector sum of the displacements due to each of the two waves. The resultant wave which is produced is also shown. It is seen that the amplitude varies with time that gives rise to variation of loudness which we call beats.
Beat frequency: The difference between the frequencies of the two waves is called beat frequency, denoted by N. The time interval between the two successive loud sounds is T = t₂ - t₁. During this time interval the number of oscillation of the 1st wave is f₁ T and that of the 2nd wave is f₂ T. But the 1st wave should have made one oscillation more than the 2nd one. therefore, f₁ T - f₂ T = 1. or N = f = 1/T (8.19). Where f₁ - f₂ = f = beat frequency and T is the period of beat. The phenomenon of beats is used in finding the unknown frequencies and also in tuning the musical instruments. Tuning is the process of adjusting the pitch of one or many tones from musical instruments until they form desired arrangement. Pitch is the perceived fundamental frequency of a sound. Instruments basically just produce vibrations, and these vibrations produce the sound that we hear. The vibrations or sound waves that an instrument produces are measured by hertz. Tuning may be carried out by sounding two pitches and adjusting one of them to match or to relate the other. Several different devices may be used to produce the reference pitch such as, tuning forks and pianos, etc. So when you are tuning, you are trying to match the frequency, or vibration, of one note to another. If the two pitches you play are at different frequencies, it will produce a beating sound which is called “Interference beats’. As the two notes approach a harmonic relationship, the frequency of beating decreases. To get the note in tune you adjust the instrument until the beating slows down so much that it cannot be detected.

Example 8.5
Two pianos sound the same note. If the vibration from one is 221.60 Hz and that of the other is 221.40 Hz. What is the beat frequency between the two tones?
Frequency of piano one f₁ = 221.60 Hz, frequency of second piano f₂ = 221.40 Hz. Required: beat frequency = ?
Solution: Beat frequency = |f₁ - f₂| = 221.60 Hz - 221.40 Hz = 0.20 Hz.

Assignment 8.2
How many beats per second are heard when two tuning forks of 256 Hz and 259 Hz are sounded together?

8.9 REFLECTION OF WAVES AND PHASE CHANGE
The bouncing back of waves from the boundary of a certain medium is called reflection of waves.
i. Mechanical Waves: The behavior of a mechanical wave at the boundary can be studied by sending wave pulses along a narrow spring or string. In the Fig 8.19, the right hand end of string is fixed at the wall and a transverse upward pulse is set in it by hand traveling towards the wall. When this crest strikes the wall a part of its energy is absorbed and the rest is reflected. Since the wall does not move up with the crest in same way as it pulls the string upward, so the wall exert downward pull on the string. This pull accelerates the string downward to such an extent that its momentum carries it below the zero line. The result is that upward displacement pulse is reflected as a downward displacement. A phase change of 180° or π radians has occurred which is equal to half a wavelength (λ/2) between the incident and reflected pulses. On the other hand if the fixed end of the string is attached to a ring which can move freely up and down, as shown in Fig.8.20(b). When the wave pulse arrive the end, the ring moves up and as the ring moves down, an upward pulse is produced. There is no phase change in this case. This result may be summarized by saying that when a transverse wave on a string is reflected from a denser medium, there is a phase change of 180° or π rad. But when a transverse wave on string is reflected from the boundary of a rare medium it suffers no phase change. The same principal is applicable for longitudinal waves.
ii. Electromagnetic Waves: The phase change also occurs when electromagnetic waves such as light waves are reflected from the boundary of a denser medium. Various techniques have been developed for locating the position of objects by reflecting the waves of known speed from them, as radar (radio audio detection and ranging) waves.

Reflection of Sound Waves: Sound waves obey the laws of reflection just like the other types of waves. The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. The regular reflection of sound waves occur at the surface if it treats all the parts of the incident wave front similarly. To do this it must be flat, with in a fraction of the wavelength of the waves falling on it. The sound waves of frequency greater than 20 kHz are used to determine the crowd of fishes in the depth of ocean. A sound pulse is sent out under water from a ship, after being reflected from the sea bottom, the sound is detected by an underwater receiver, mounted on the ship and the time interval is recorded by special device. Submarines are also detected by the under water sound waves produced by their propellers.
Echo: The reflection of an original sound from a certain object is received at 0.1 s later than the direct sound is called echo. Since the speed of sound in the air is about 340 m s⁻¹, so the effective distance for echo is d = (340 x 0.1)/2 = 17 m. The formation of echoes in public halls and auditoriums which is annoying to ear can be remedied by selecting proper dimensions and by avoiding continuous flat smooth walls.
Reverberation: When the reflecting surface is at a distance less than 17 m away from the source of sound, then the echo follows, so close upon the direct sound that they can not be distinguished. This effect is known as reverberation, which causes the general confusion of the sound impression on the ear.

8.10 STATIONARY WAVES
The sound produced by most of string and wind musical instruments is due to the formation of stationary waves or standing waves in these instruments. The vibration in the string of a guitar or piano set up stationary waves of definite frequencies. Now question arises that what is the difference between stationary waves and progressive waves? How are stationary waves produced? Stationary waves can be set up in any medium which do not transmit energy from one place to another place like progressive waves. When two plane waves having the same amplitude and frequency, traveling with the same speed in opposite direction along a line, are superposed, a wave obtained is called stationary or standing wave.
Activity: To demonstrate standing waves take a rubber cord and tie its one end with strong support and wiggle its other end by holding it in your hand with some frequency f. A series of transverse waves is produced traveling along the rope from your hand. Reaching the fixed end they are reflected with slightly different shape. When they come across with the new generated waves, they superpose and as a result stationary wave is produced due to which the whole cord vibrates in one loop. Here the wave form does not move in the direction of either the incident waves or the reflected waves. That is why it is called stationary wave. The end points of the cord which do not vibrate at all are called nodes, indicated by N. All the midpoints between the two successive nodes, where the amplitude of oscillation is maximum are known as anti-node denoted by A. The distance between two successive nodes or anti-nodes is equal to half of the wavelength (λ/2). While the distance between adjacent node and anti-node is equal to λ/4. Now if we increase the wiggling frequency the stationary wave subsides, but when the wiggling frequency is increased to double of the initial frequency (2f₀), then again stationary wave is set up, and the cord now vibrates in two loops. This frequency is known as the second harmonic. Similarly if the frequency is increased to 3f₀, 4f₀, ......, nf₀ then stationary waves of 3rd, 4th, ..., nth harmonics are set up and the cord will vibrate in 3, 4, 5, ..., n loops.

8.11 TRANSVERSE STATIONARY WAVES IN A STRETCHED STRING
A standing wave obtained due to the superposition of transverse waves is called transverse stationary wave. To demonstrate mechanical transverse stationary waves, consider a string of length “L” which is kept stretched by clamping its two ends so that the tension in the string is “T” as shown in fig. To find the characteristics frequencies of vibration we have to pluck the string at different places.
i. Plucked at its Middle: Let the string is plucked at its middle point, two transverse waves originate from this point. One of these waves move towards the left end of the string and the other towards the right end. When these waves reach the clamped ends, they are reflected back. They meet at the middle where they superpose each other and as a result a stationary wave is set up. The whole string will vibrate in one loop, with nodes at the fixed ends and anti-node at the middle as shown in the Figure (8.24). The frequency of the stationary wave is equal to the frequency of the two progressive waves f₁. To establish a relationship between the length of the string and wavelength λ₁ of the waves we know that the distance between successive nodes is equal to half a wavelength L = λ₁/2. or λ₁ = 2L (i). If v is the speed of either of the component progressive wave, then f₁ = v / λ₁ = v / (2L) (8.20). If M is the total mass of the string then the speed v of the progressive wave along the string is given by v = √(T L / M). Here T is tension in the string and L is its length. So the frequency f₁ is f₁ = (1/(2L)) √(T L / M). If m is the mass per unit length i.e m = M/L then the above equation becomes f₁ = (1/(2L)) √(T / m) (8.21). This characteristic frequency f₁ of vibration is called the fundamental frequency or first harmonic.
ii. String Plucked at quarter length: If the same string of length L and mass per unit length m is plucked from one quarter of its length then again stationary wave will be set up but now the string will vibrate with another frequency f₂ in two loops, as shown in Fig (8.25). If λ₂ is the wave length of this mode of vibration then we have L = λ₂. λ₂ = L (ii). The frequency f₂ of this mode of vibration is f₂ = v / λ₂ = v / L. f₂ = (1/L) √(T / m) = (2/(2L)) √(T / m). f₂ = 2 f₁ (8.22). Thus when the string vibrates in two loops its frequency of vibration is doubled as compared to mode one.
iii. String plucked at one sixth of its length: When the same string is plucked at one sixth of its length, it will now oscillate with the characteristic frequency f₃ in three segments as shown in Figure (8.26). The wavelength λ₃ in this mode of vibration is L = (3 λ₃)/2. λ₃ = (2L)/3 (iii). The frequency f₃ is f₃ = v / λ₃ = (3v)/(2L). f₃ = 3 f₁ (8.23).
iv. String plucked at arbitrary point: To generalize the above discussion, let the string is plucked at some arbitrary point, so that the string resonates in n number of loops, with (n + 1) nodes and n anti-nodes. The wavelength λ_n in this vibration is λ_n = 2L / n (8.24). And the frequency f_n is f_n = n v / (2L). f_n = (n/(2L)) √(T / m) (8.25).

Conclusions
From the above discussion we get the following conclusions.
i. The string always resonates in whole segments where a segment is the distance between the two adjacent nodes. Thus a string fastened firmly at its two ends will resonate only if it is a whole number multiple of half wavelength long i.e. L = λ/2, 2λ/2, 3λ/2, ...
ii. We also see that as the string vibrate in more and more loops its frequency goes on increasing and the wavelength gets correspondingly decreasing. However the product of the frequency and wavelength is always equal to the velocity of waves.

8.12 FUNDAMENTAL AND OVERTONE VIBRATION
From the above discussion it is also clear that a string fixed firmly at its two ends resonates to only certain very special frequencies i.e. f₁, f₂, f₃, ... The lowest characteristics frequency of vibration f₁ is called the fundamental frequency or first harmonic. The other possible modes of vibration whose frequencies are all integral multiple of the lowest frequency are called overtones or harmonics.
When a stretched string is excited by a small periodic force having a frequency equal to any of the quantized frequencies of the string, the phenomena of resonance will take place and stationary wave will be set up on the string.
Quantization of Frequencies: It is observed that stationary waves on the string can be set up only with a discrete set of frequencies f₁, f₂, f₃, ... This shows that the resonant frequencies of the string are quantized, meaning that they are separated by frequency gaps. In other words quantum jumps in frequency exist between the resonance frequencies. This phenomenon is known as the quantization of frequency.

EXAMPLE 8.6
The speed of a wave on a particular string is 24 m s⁻¹. If the string is 6.0 m long to what driving frequency will it resonate.
Length of string = L = 6 m, Speed of the wave = v = 24 m s⁻¹. Required: driving frequency = ?
Solution: The possible resonance wavelengths are given by λ_n = 2L / n. λ₁ = 12 m, λ₂ = 6 m, λ₃ = 4 m. Thus the possible frequencies are f₁ = v/λ₁ = 24/12 = 2 Hz, f₂ = v/λ₂ = 24/6 = 4 Hz, f₃ = v/λ₃ = 24/4 = 6 Hz. 2 Hz, 4 Hz and 6 Hz.

EXAMPLE 8.7
A string 4.0 m long has a mass of 3.0 g. One end of the string is fastened to a stop and the other end hangs over a pulley with a 20 kg mass attached. What is the speed of a transverse wave in this string?
Length of string = L = 4.0 m, Mass of string = 3.0 g = 0.003 kg. Required: Speed of a transverse wave v = ?
Solution: Mass per unit length = m = M/L = 0.003 kg / 4.0 m = 7.5 x 10⁻⁴ kg m⁻¹. Tension T = M g = 20 x 9.8 = 196 N. v = √(T / m) = √(196 N / 7.5 x 10⁻⁴ kg m⁻¹) = 511 m s⁻¹.

ASSIGNMENT 8.3
A 40-g string 2 m in length vibrates in three loops. The tension in the string is 270 N. What is the wavelength and frequency? (4.33 m, 87.1 Hz)

8.13 RESONANCE OF AIR COLUMN AND ORGAN PIPES
As stationary wave can be set up in any medium with a discrete set of frequency, so in addition to a stretched string or spring or an elastic membrane etc, stationary waves can be set up in the air column. If you hold a sounded tuning fork over the open end of a glass tube filled with water. The sound of tuning fork can be greatly amplified under certain conditions. Holding the vibrating tuning fork, slowly lower the water surface in the tube with the help of reservoir. At a certain height of the water level, the air column in the tube will resonate loudly to the sound being sent into it by the tuning fork as shown in Figure 8.27. The resonance occurs when the frequency f of the periodic force due to tuning fork becomes equal to the fundamental frequency f₁ of the air column. In fact there are usually several heights at which the tube will resonate. The stationary longitudinal waves in the air column in a pipe or tube are the source of sound in wind musical instruments, such as flute, organ, trombone, clarinet etc as shown in Figure. (8.28).

Organ Pipes
We shall now apply our knowledge of a vibrating air column to the study of organ pipes. An organ pipe is the simplest example of an instrument which produces sound by means of vibrating air column. Organ pipes are of two types.
i. Closed organ pipe.
ii. Open organ pipe.
In both these types an air column is made to vibrate by blowing in to the whistle end, which is simplest in construction but its action is quite simple.

i. Closed Organ Pipe
A pipe, whose end opposite to the whistle end is closed, is called a closed organ pipe. The air column in a closed organ pipe is set into vibration by sending a narrow jet of air towards this edge or lip at the open end. When the air strikes the lip, a compression is sent into the pipe. This compression strikes the closed end and is reflected to the open end. At the lip this compression pushes the air stream outside the lip and as a result a rarefaction is sent into the pipe. The rarefaction is reflected from the closed end and returns to the lip where it draws the air stream into the pipe producing a new compression which is sent into the pipe. In this manner the air column in the pipe is set into vigorous vibrations with large amplitude and a stationary wave is set up. A node is formed at the closed end. Antinode is formed at the open end, as the air molecules can easily move out into the open space there and so at that point there will be maximum vibration, as in the Figure 8.29(a). Since the wave travels the length of the pipe four times.
(a) First Harmonic: If “L” is the length of the pipe and "λ₁" is the wavelength of sound then L = λ₁/4. λ₁ = 4L (i). If ‘v’ is the speed of traveling wave sent into the pipe then the frequency ‘f₁’ is f₁ = v / λ₁ = v / (4L) (ii). This frequency "f₁" is called the fundamental or first harmonic.
(b) Second Harmonic: If the air column vibrates for the second harmonic as in the Fig.(8.29)(b) then the length “L" of the air column is related with the wavelength “λ₂" as L = (3 λ₂)/4. λ₂ = (4L)/3 (iii). The frequency “f₂” is f₂ = v / λ₂ = (3v)/(4L). f₂ = 3 f₁ (iv).
(c) Third Harmonic: If the air column of the pipe vibrates for third harmonic as in the Fig.(8.29)(c), in two and a half loop then the length "L" of the air column is related with the wavelength "λ₃" as L = (5 λ₃)/4. λ₃ = (4L)/5 (v). The frequency "f₃" is f₃ = v / λ₃ = (5v)/(4L). or f₃ = 5 f₁ (vi). Thus the possible frequencies in the air column are f_n = (2n - 1) v/(4L) where n = 1, 2, 3, ... Here the lowest frequency v/(4L) is called the fundamental frequency, while all the higher frequencies which are odd multiple of the fundamental frequency are known as harmonics.

ii. Open Organ Pipe
A pipe whose end opposite to the blowing end is open is called open organ pipe. Since both the ends of this pipe are open, so there are antinodes at both the ends with a node at the middle. The modes of vibration of open organ pipe are given below:
(a) Fundamental Frequency: If the air column in the open organ pipe oscillates for stationary wave as in the Fig 8.30, then the length "L" of the air column is related with the wavelength λ₁ as L = λ₁/2. λ₁ = 2L (i). The frequency "f₁" of this vibration is f₁ = v / λ₁ = v / (2L) (ii).
(b) Second Harmonic: If the air column in the open organ pipe oscillates for second harmonic as in the Fig (8.30)(b) then the wavelength λ₂ is L = λ₂. λ₂ = L (iii). The frequency “f₂” is f₂ = v / λ₂ = v / L = 2 (v/(2L)). f₂ = 2 f₁ (iv).
(c) Third Harmonic: If the air column of the open organ pipe vibrates for third harmonic as in the Fig 8.30 (c) then the wavelength λ₃ is L = (3 λ₃)/2. λ₃ = (2L)/3. The frequency "f₃" is f₃ = v / λ₃ = (3v)/(2L) = 3 (v/(2L)). f₃ = 3 f₁ (v). To generalize the above discussion the wavelength λ_n and frequency f_n for the n-th harmonic are given by λ_n = 2L / n (vi). And f_n = n v / (2L). Thus the lowest frequency is called the fundamental or first harmonic, while all the higher frequencies which are the integral multiple of the fundamental frequency are known as 2nd, 3rd, ... harmonics.

EXAMPLE 8.9 OPEN PIPE
A pipe open at one end and close at the other end is 82 cm long. What are the three lowest frequencies to which it will resonate? Take the speed of sound as 340 m s⁻¹.
Length of the pipe = 82 cm = 0.82 m, Speed of sound = 340 m s⁻¹. Required: Frequency f₁ = ?, f₂ = ? & f₃ = ?
Solution: For the lowest frequency the wavelength λ₁ = 4L. And f₁ = v / λ₁ = v / (4L) = 340 / (4 x 0.82) = 104 Hz. As in closed pipe only odd harmonics are present. Therefore the frequency of 2nd harmonics is f₂ = 3 f₁ = 3 x 104 = 312 Hz. And f₃ = 5 f₁ = 5 x 104 = 520 Hz. 104 Hz, 312 Hz & 520 Hz.

ASSIGNMENT 8.5
What length of closed pipe will produce a fundamental frequency of 256 Hz at 20°C? (33.5 cm)

8.14 DOPPLER EFFECT
The apparent change in the frequency of sound, caused by the relative motion of either the source of sound or listener or both, is called Doppler Effect. Doppler Effect interrelates the measured frequency of the wave to the relative velocity of the source of sound and receiver. This phenomenon is called Doppler Effect after Christian Johann Doppler who showed in 1842 that frequency shift should be observed for sound and light waves due to relative motion between source and observer. To further describe Doppler Effect consider a source of sound “S” emitting sound waves of velocity ‘v’, frequency "f" and wavelength ‘λ’. When the source "S" and listener ‘L’ are at rest then the listener will receive "f" number of waves in one second. The distance between source "S" and listener “L” is v. Since “f" number of waves are compressed in distance ‘v’, so the wavelength λ is λ = v / f.

8.15.1 The Source is moving and listener is at rest:
In this case either the sounding source moves towards the stationary listener or away from the stationary listener.
(I-A) Source moves towards a stationary listener: Let the sounding source “S” is moving with speed "a" towards the stationary listener “L” shown in the Fig 8.31. The first wave emitted by the source covers distance ‘v’ after 1 s and reaches the listener “L”. At the end of one second the source covers distance “a” where it gives the last wave. Thus in this case "f" number of waves are compressed in a distance (v - a) as shown in Fig 8.31. So the apparent wavelength λ’ is λ’ = (v - a) / f. The changed frequency f’ is f’ = v / λ’ = v / ((v - a)/f) = (v / (v - a)) f (8.27). This equation shows that if the sounding source is approaching a stationary listener the frequency of sound increases. As a result pitch of sound increases.
(I-B) Source moves away from stationary listener: If the sounding source “S” is moving away from the stationary listener then "f" number of waves are contained in distance (v + a), so the apparent wavelength λ’ is λ’ = (v + a) / f (i). The apparent frequency f’ is f’ = v / λ’ = v / ((v + a)/f) = (v / (v + a)) f (8.28). As f’ < f, so the pitch of sound decrease when the sounding source is moving away from the stationary listener.

8.15.2 Source is at rest and listener is moving
It is also possible that when the listener either moves, towards or away from the stationary sounding sources, the pitch of sound changes.
(II-A) Listener moves towards a stationary sounding source: Let the listener “L” is moving with speed ‘b’ towards a stationary sounding source “S” as shown in the Fig 8.32. In this case if we add the speed of listener with the speed of sound, we shall get the case in which sound waves are moving with speed (v + b), where source of sound is at rest. So the speed of sound relative to the listener is (v + b) and wavelength remains the same. Therefore, the apparent frequency f’ is f’ = (v + b) / λ. But λ = v / f. Therefore f’ = ((v + b) / v) f (8.29). Since f’ > f so pitch of sound increases, when the listener moves towards a stationary sounding source.
(II-B) Listener moves away from stationary sounding source: When the listener moves away with speed “b" from a stationary sounding source, the speed of sound relative to the listener becomes v - b. As the wavelength remains the same so the observed frequency is f’ = (v - b) / λ = ((v - b) / v) f (8.30). Since here f’ < f so the pitch of sound decreases when the listener moves away from the stationary sounding source of sound.

8.15.3 When Source and listener both moves
It is also possible that when source and listener both moves, the pitch of sound also changes.
(C.1) Source and listener both moves towards each other: If the source and listener are approaching each other with velocities a and b, respectively, then the apparent wavelength λ’ is given by λ’ = (v - a) / f. The speed of sound relative to the listener is v’ = v + b. The apparent frequency f’ is f’ = v’ / λ’ = (v + b) / ((v - a)/f) = ((v + b)/(v - a)) f (8.31). As f’ > f, so the pitch of sound increases when source and listener are approaching to each other.
8.15.4 (C. II) Source and listener move away from each other: When the source of sound and listener are moving away from each other, then apparent wavelength λ’ is λ’ = (v + a) / f. The speed of sound relative to the listener is v’ = v - b. The apparent frequency f’ is f’ = v’ / λ’ = (v - b) / ((v + a)/f) = ((v - b)/(v + a)) f (8.32). As f’ < f, so the pitch of sound decreases when source and listener moving away from each other.

Applications of Doppler Effect
Following are the some important applications of Doppler frequency shift.
i. Doppler Effect is not confined to sound waves but equally applicable to light waves. The frequency of light being received from certain stars which are moving towards or away from the earth is found to be slightly different than the frequency of the same light emitted by a source on the earth.
ii. Another interesting application of Doppler Effect is the reflection of radar waves from an aeroplane. The frequency of reflected waves is decreased, if the plane is moving away from the source. The frequency of reflected waves is increased if the plane is moving towards the source. From this frequency shift the speed and direction of the plane can be determined.
iii. When sound waves are reflected from a moving submarine, their frequency is changed. By this change in frequency we can calculate the speed and direction of the submarine. The velocities of the earth satellites are also determined from the Doppler Shift in the frequency of radio waves which they transmit.

EXAMPLE 8.10
A car is moving at 20 m s⁻¹ along a straight road with its 500 Hz horn sounding. You are standing at the road side. What frequency do you hear as the car is (a) approaching you and (b) receding from you at 20 m s⁻¹? Take the speed of sound as 340 m s⁻¹.
Frequency of sound = f = 500 Hz, Speed of sound = v = 340 m s⁻¹, Speed of sound source = a = 20 m s⁻¹.
(a) The apparent frequency when the car approaches = f’ = ? (b) The apparent frequency when receding the car = f’ = ?
Solution:
(a) When the sounding source approaches the stationary listener the apparent frequency heard is f’ = (v / (v - a)) f. f’ = (340 / (340 - 20)) x 500 = 531 Hz.
(b) When the car receding f’ = (v / (v + a)) f = (340 / (340 + 20)) x 500 = 472 Hz.
(a) 531 Hz, (b) 472 Hz.

ASSIGNMENT 8.6
(a) What frequency is received by a women watching an oncoming ambulance moving at 110 km/h and emitting a steady 800-Hz sound from its siren? The speed of sound on this day is 345 m/s. (b) What frequency does she receive after the ambulance has passed? (a). 878 Hz; (b). 735 Hz.

8.16 ULTRASONIC WAVES
A normal human ear can hear a sound if its frequency lies between 20 Hz to 20000 Hz. If the frequency of a sound is higher than 20000 Hz, it cannot be heard. The sounds of frequencies higher than 20000 Hz are called ultrasonics. The term ultrasonics means above or beyond sound. Ultrasonics sound can be produced by an object vibrating at a frequency higher than the frequency which human ear can hear. This frequency can run from 20000 Hz to any desired frequency, but normally with a range of 20 kHz to 100 kHz. However an ultrasonic device has been developed that vibrates at 25 billion Hz. An ultrasonic wave is a pressure wave which has an extremely short wavelength because of its high frequency. This can be seen from the relationship v = f λ. Where "v" is a constant while “f” and “λ” are inversely proportional to each other. In fact an ultrasonic wave of 25 billion hertz has wavelength of about 10⁻⁸ m, which is smaller than the wavelength of visible light (10⁻⁷ m) and comparable to the wavelength of x-rays (10⁻¹⁰ m). It can be shown that a wave is affected only by an object which is larger than its wavelength. Therefore there is a direct relationship between the depth of penetration and the wavelength of the wave falling on an object.
Uses of ultrasonic waves: Ultrasonic waves carry much more energy than the sound waves of equal amplitude but low frequency. Following are the some important uses of ultrasonic waves. The penetrating power of ultrasonic waves makes them valuable in medicine for diagnostic work and bloodless surgery. In diagnostic work an ultrasonic signal is transmitted through a patient. By the analysis of reflected or refracted signals, the cysts and tumor in the body can be located. The use of ultrasonic waves in surgery has shown great importance.
ii. One technical application of ultrasonic wave is non destructive testing of metals. Ultrasonic waves of high frequency are made to travel in a beam with a little spreading. Such a beam can explore physical defects in a medium by reflection. An ultrasonic pulse penetrating a metal when strike a flaw, which has different acoustical properties from the surrounding material, is reflected. In the Figure 8.35, three pulses are obtained on the display CRO, they are due to the transmitted pulse A, the pulse reflected B from the flaw and pulse C reflected from the boundary of the specimen. The detection of this reflected pulse reveals the presence of defects such as an internal crack or cavity in the metal.
iii. Ultrasonic waves in liquids can be used for cleaning metal parts by removing all the traces of foreign matter sticking to the metal in otherwise inaccessible places.
iv. Bacteria and micro-organisms in liquids and air can be killed by ultrasonic waves of sufficient intensity. The ability to focus very intense ultrasonic waves in a small region without disturbing the surrounding tissues provides a very effective tool in neurosurgery. Special types of ultrasonic equipments are in use for the treatment of arthritis, muscular rheumatism and sciatica.
v. The ultrasonic waves are used in a process, such as cavitations, which helps in degassing. When ultrasonic waves are focused on a small space in liquid, very high intensity can be produced. The liquid is rapidly volatilized and a large number of bubbles are formed. This process is called cavitations. The collapse of these bubbles produces violently destructive forces near the solid surface in a liquid.

8.16.1 Generation of Ultrasonic Waves
Ultrasonic waves can be generated by any object which is capable of oscillation at a frequency higher than 20 kHz.
1. In most of application, ultrasonic waves are generated by applying an electric current to a specialized kind of crystal known as Piezoelectric Crystal. This crystal converts electrical energy into mechanical energy, as a result the crystal is set to vibrate at high frequency, generating ultrasonic waves v = f λ.
2. In another Technique a magnetic field is applied to a special crystal which causing it to oscillate at a frequency higher than 20 kHz, emitting ultrasonic waves.

Detection of Ultrasonic Waves
There are so many methods by which ultrasonic waves can be detected, but here we shall consider only two methods.
(a) Piezoelectric Detection method: As ultrasonic waves consisting of compressions and rarefaction so when they are allowed to fall on a quartz crystal, a certain Potential difference is produced across the crystal faces. This difference is amplified by an amplifier and the ultrasonic waves are detected. V = V₀ sin ωt. V = V₀ sin 2π f t.
(b) Kundt’s tube method: Kundt's tube is a long glass tube supported horizontally with an air column in it. The lycopodium powder is sprinkled in the tube. When ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through this Kundt’s tube. The Lycopodium powder in the tube collects at the nodes and blown off at the antinodes. This method is used when the wavelength is not very short.

SUMMARY
Wave: A disturbance of some kind by means of which energy is transmitted from one place to another place, is called wave.
Mechanical Waves: Those waves which require medium for their propagation are called mechanical waves.
Electromagnetic Waves: Those waves which do not require medium for their propagation are known as electromagnetic waves.
Transverse Waves: A wave in which the particles of the medium vibrate along a line perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave is called transverse wave.
Longitudinal Wave: A wave in which the particles of the medium vibrate along a line parallel to the direction of propagation the wave is known as longitudinal wave.
Interference of Waves: The effect produced due to the superposition of waves from two coherent sources is known as interference.
Beats: The periodic vibration in the loudness of sound which is heard when two notes of nearly the same frequency are played simultaneously is known as beats.
Stationary Waves: The superposition of two plane waves having the same amplitude and frequency, traveling with the same speed in opposite direction along a line, produces a wave known as stationary wave.
Resonance: The vibration of a body or the air column under the influence of periodic force which has the same frequency is called resonance.
Organ Pipes: Organ pipes are of two types. A pipe, whose end opposite to the whistle end is closed, is called a closed organ pipe. While a pipe whose end opposite to the blowing end is open, is known as open organ pipe.
Doppler Effect: The apparent change in the frequency of sound caused by the relative motion of either the source of sound or listener or both is called Doppler Effect.
Ultrasonic Waves: The sound waves of frequency higher than 20000 Hz are called ultrasonic waves.