13sandpblock_2ndchem_fed.txt

13 s- and p- Block Elements. 13.1 PERIOD 3 (Na to Ar). 13.1.1 Atomic and Physical Properties of the Period 3 Elements. (This period contains Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl and Ar). (a) Atomic Properties. Electronic Structures. In Period 3 of the Periodic Table, the 3s and 3p orbitals are filled with electrons. Just as: Na = [Ne] 3s¹. Mg = [Ne] 3s². Al = [Ne] 3s² 3p¹. Si = [Ne] 3s² 3p². P = [Ne] 3s² 3p³. S = [Ne] 3s² 3p⁴. Cl = [Ne] 3s² 3p⁵. Ar = [Ne] 3s² 3p⁶. In each case, [Ne] represents the complete electronic structure of a neon (1s² 2s² 2p⁶) atom. 1. Atomic and ionic Radii. The average distance between the nucleus and the outermost orbit of an atom/ion is called atomic/ionic radius. Trends. The number of shells in all the elements of a given period remains the same, but the effective nuclear charge increases from left to right. The increased effective nuclear charge pulls the electron cloud of the atom nearer to the nucleus. Thus, the size of the atoms and ions go on decreasing in periods of s- and p- block elements. Table 13.1: Atomic and Ionic radii of period 3 elements (s- and p- block elements). However, the size of the atoms of inert gases is larger than that of the preceding halogens due to interelectronic repulsion. Do you know? (1) A cation is smaller in size than its parent atom because of greater effective nuclear charge and lesser shielding effect. (2) An anion is bigger in size than its parent atom because of lesser effective nuclear charge and strong shielding effect. 2. Ionization energy. Ionization energy is the minimum amount of energy required to remove one mole of the most loosely held electrons from one mole of isolated gaseous atoms to produce one mole of unipositive gaseous ion. X(g) → X⁺(g) + e⁻. Factors affecting ionization energy. Ionization energy depends upon following factors: The atomic size, Nuclear charge, Shielding/Screening effect, Nature of orbital. Trends. In general, as we move from left to right in a period, the ionization energy of the elements increases due to the successive increase in the nuclear charge and decrease in atomic size. However, there are certain elements which show anomalous/irregular trends in period 3. Anomalous trend. Ionization energy of Mg and P are higher than those of Al and S. Reason: In case of Mg (1s²,2s²,2p⁶, 3s²), it is more difficult to remove an electron from the completely filled, low energy 3s-orbital while in case of Al (1s²,2s²,2p⁶, 3s²,3p¹) it is easier to remove the same from partially filled high energy 3p-orbital. That is why ionization energy of Mg is higher than that of Al. Higher value of phosphorus as compared to sulphur has been explained, similarly, on the same lines of argument as used in explaining the higher value of Mg compared to Al. Table 13.2: The values of First Ionization Energy of Period 3 elements. 3. Electron affinity. The amount of energy released (or absorbed in some cases), when an electron is added to a gaseous atom to form a negative ion is known as electron affinity. For example, F(g) + e⁻ → F⁻(g) ; E.A. = -328 kJ mol⁻¹. This is the amount of energy released when an electron is added in an atom. When a second electron is added to a uni-negative ion, the incoming electron is repelled by the already present negative charge, so energy is absorbed and is called second electron affinity. O(g) + e⁻ → O⁻(g) ; E.A.(1st) = -141 kJ mol⁻¹. O⁻(g) + e⁻ → O²⁻(g) ; E.A.(2nd) = +780 kJ mol⁻¹. Trends. Electron affinity generally increases with increase in the effective nuclear charge across a period and decreases with increase in atomic number down a group as atomic size increases due to shielding effect. Anomalous Trend. Halogens have high electron affinities which decreases from Chlorine to Iodine. Chlorine in this group has the highest electron affinity (-349 kJ mol⁻¹). The lower value of electron affinity for fluorine (-328 kJ mol⁻¹) is due to its small size and inter electronic repulsion between electron added and electrons already present (i.e. compact 2p orbital of F atom). 4. Electronegativity. Electronegativity is a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract a shared pair of electrons towards itself. Electronegativity has no units. The most commonly used scale for its measurement is the Pauling scale. According to this scale, fluorine (the most electronegative element) is assigned a value of 4.0, and values range down to Caesium and Francium which are the least electronegative elements. Trends. (i) On moving from left to right in a period, there is a decrease in the size of the atoms. Smaller atoms have greater tendency to attract the electrons towards themselves i.e. smaller atoms have higher electronegativity values. (ii) In going down a group, there is an increase in the size of atom, so electronegativity decreases. (b) Physical Properties. We will discuss electrical conductivity, melting point and boiling point in this section. 1. Electrical Conductivity. Electrical conductivity is the ability of a substance to conduct the electric current due to the presence of charged particles (free electrons, ions). Trends. Electrical conductivity of elements of period 3 increases as we move from sodium to aluminium and then decreases at the end of the period. Sodium, magnesium and aluminium are all good conductors of electricity. Conductivity increases as we move from sodium to aluminium due to increase in number of delocalized electrons. These delocalised electrons are free to move throughout the solid or the liquid metal. Silicon is a semiconductor. The remaining elements (P, S, Cl₂, Ar) do not conduct electricity because they form simple molecular structure having no free electrons. 2. Melting and Boiling Points. The melting and boiling points tell us about the strength of forces present among atoms, ions and molecules within a substance. In the case of elements, the values of melting and boiling points are according to the bonding forces present in them. Trend. As we move from left to the right in a period, the melting and boiling points increase up to the middle i.e. group IV-A and then decrease from group V-A to noble gases (zero group elements.) Reasons. (1) The melting and boiling points are high up to the middle because these elements contain increasing number of binding electrons from I to III while silicon has giant covalent structure. (2) The melting and boiling points are low from P to Ar because these elements exist in the form of simple molecules and have weak intermolecular forces up to Argon. Quick Quiz. 1. Why are cations smaller and anions bigger than parent atom? 2. Give the trends of ionization energy and electronegativity of period-3 elements. 3. Explain the trend of melting and boiling points of the elements of period-3. 13.1.2 Chemical Reactions of the Period 3 Elements. (a) Reactions with Water. Sodium. Sodium has a highly exothermic reaction with cold water producing hydrogen and a colourless solution of sodium hydroxide. 2Na + 2H₂O → 2NaOH + H₂ (exothermic). Magnesium. Magnesium has a very slight reaction with cold water to form magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen but burns in steam with its typical white flame forming magnesium oxide and hydrogen. Mg + 2H₂O (cold) → Mg(OH)₂ + H₂. Mg + H₂O (steam) → MgO + H₂. Aluminium. Aluminium powder heated in steam produces aluminium oxide and hydrogen gas. The reaction is relatively slow because of the protective layer of aluminium oxide on its surface, and the build-up of even more oxide during the reaction. 2Al + 3H₂O (steam) → Al₂O₃ + 3H₂. Silicon, Phosphorus and Sulphur. They have no reaction with water. Chlorine. Chlorine dissolves in water to some extent to give a green solution. A reversible reaction takes place to produce a mixture of hydrochloric acid and chloric (I) acid (hypochlorous acid). Cl₂ + H₂O ⇌ HCl + HOCl. In the presence of sunlight, the chloric (I) acid slowly decomposes to produce more hydrochloric acid. 2Cl₂ + 2H₂O (sunlight) → 4HCl + O₂. Argon. There is no reaction between argon and water. (b) Reactions with Oxygen. Sodium. Sodium burns in oxygen with yellow flame to produce a white solid mixture of sodium oxide and sodium peroxide. 4Na + O₂ → 2Na₂O (sodium oxide). 2Na + O₂ → Na₂O₂ (sodium peroxide). Magnesium. Magnesium burns in oxygen with an intense white flame to give white solid magnesium oxide. 2Mg + O₂ → 2MgO. Aluminium. Aluminium combines with oxygen on heating to produce a thin protective layer of aluminium oxide which protects the metal from further corrosion. 4Al + 3O₂ → 2Al₂O₃. Silicon. Silicon will burn in oxygen if heated strongly. Silicon dioxide is produced. Si + O₂ → SiO₂. Phosphorus. White phosphorus catches fire spontaneously in air, burning with a white flame and producing clouds of white smoke (mixture of phosphorus (III) oxide and phosphorus (V) oxide). The proportions of these oxides depend on the amount of oxygen available. In an excess of oxygen, the product will be almost entirely phosphorus (V) oxide. For the phosphorus (III) oxide: P₄ + 3O₂ → P₄O₆. For the phosphorus (V) oxide: P₄ + 5O₂ → P₄O₁₀. Sulphur. Sulphur burns in air or oxygen with a pale blue flame. It produces colourless sulphur dioxide gas. S + O₂ → SO₂. Chlorine and Argon. Despite having several oxides, chlorine would not react directly with oxygen. Argon does not react either. (c) Reactions with Chlorine. Sodium. Sodium burns in chlorine with a bright orange flame. White solid of sodium chloride is produced. 2Na + Cl₂ → 2NaCl. Magnesium. Magnesium burns with its usual intense white flame to give white magnesium chloride. Mg + Cl₂ → MgCl₂. Aluminium. Aluminium is often reacted with chlorine by passing dry chlorine over aluminium foil heated in a long tube to produce very pale-yellow aluminium chloride. 2Al + 3Cl₂ → 2AlCl₃. Silicon. When chlorine is passed over silicon powder heated in a tube, it reacts to produce colourless silicon tetrachloride. Si + 2Cl₂ → SiCl₄. Phosphorus. White phosphorus burns in chlorine to produce a mixture of two chlorides, phosphorus (III) chloride (PCl₃) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCl₅). Phosphorus (III) chloride is a colourless fuming liquid. P₄ + 6Cl₂ → 4PCl₃. Phosphorus(V) chloride is an off-white (going towards yellow) solid. P₄ + 10Cl₂ → 4PCl₅. Sulphur. When a stream of chlorine is passed over some heated sulphur, it reacts to form an orange evil-smelling liquid, disulphur dichloride, S₂Cl₂. 2S + Cl₂ → S₂Cl₂. Chlorine and Argon. It obviously does not make sense to talk about chlorine reacting with itself, and argon does not react with chlorine. 13.1.3 Physical Properties of the Oxides. The Oxides. The oxides we shall be looking at are: Na₂O, MgO, Al₂O₃, SiO₂, P₄O₁₀, SO₃, Cl₂O₇. The oxides in the top row are known as the highest oxides of period-3 elements. These are the oxides where the Period 3 elements are in their highest oxidation states. In these oxides, all the outer electrons in the Period 3 elements are being involved in the bond formation just as one with sodium, to all seven of chlorine's outer electrons. I. Structures. The trend in structure is from the metallic oxides containing giant structures of ions on the left of the period via a giant covalent oxide (silicon dioxide) in the middle to molecular oxides on the right. II. Melting and Boiling Points. The giant structures (the metal oxides and silicon dioxide) will have high melting and boiling points because a lot of energy is needed to break the strong bonds (ionic or covalent) operating in three dimensions. The oxides of phosphorus, sulphur and chlorine consist of individual molecules. The attractive forces between these molecules will be Vander Waal’s dispersion and dipole-dipole interactions. These vary depending on the size, shape and polarity of the various molecules - but will always be much weaker than the ionic or covalent bonds. These oxides are either gases, liquids or low melting point solids. III. Electrical Conductivity. The ionic oxides of Na, Mg and Al are good conductors in solution form or molten state. These ionic solids are bad conductors in solid state. The oxides of silicon, phosphorus, sulphur and chlorine are non-ionizable, hence are non-conductors. 13.1.4. Acid-Base Behaviour of the Oxides. I. Trend in Acid-Base Behaviour. In period-3, the trend is from strongly basic oxides on the left-hand side to strongly acidic ones on the right, via an amphoteric oxide (aluminium oxide) in the middle. An amphoteric oxide is one which shows both acidic and basic properties (see table 13.3). II. Reactions of Oxides with Water, Acids and Bases. (a) Sodium oxide (Na₂O). Sodium oxide is a simple strongly basic oxide. It is basic because it contains the oxide ion, O²⁻, which is a very strong base with a high tendency to combine with hydrogen ions. O²⁻ + H₂O → 2OH⁻. Reaction with Water. Sodium oxide reacts exothermically with cold water to produce sodium hydroxide solution. Depending on its concentration, this will have a pH around 14. Na₂O + H₂O → 2NaOH. Reaction with Acids. As a strong base, sodium oxide also reacts with acids. For example, it would react with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce sodium chloride solution. Na₂O + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H₂O. (b) Magnesium oxide (MgO). Magnesium oxide is again a simple basic oxide, because it also contains oxide ions. However, it is not as strongly basic as sodium oxide because the oxide ions are not so free. In the sodium oxide case, the solid is held together by attractions between Na⁺ and O²⁻ ions. In the magnesium oxide case, the attractions are between Mg²⁺ and O²⁻. It takes more energy to break the crystal lattice of MgO having smaller ions. Thus, lattice energy of MgO is greater than Na₂O. Reaction with Water. When we shake some white magnesium oxide powder with water, some magnesium hydroxide is formed in the reaction, but this is almost insoluble and so not many hydroxide ions actually get into solution. The pH of an aqueous solution of magnesium oxide is around 9 showing that it is slightly alkaline. MgO + H₂O → Mg(OH)₂. Reaction with Acids. It reacts with warm dilute hydrochloric acid to give magnesium chloride solution. MgO + 2HCl → MgCl₂ + H₂O. (c) Aluminium oxide (Al₂O₃). As it is an amphoteric oxide, it has reactions as both a base and an acid. Aluminium oxide is an ionic oxide which allows it to act as a base. The ions in it have high charge density and hence it has a partial covalent character allowing it to act as an acidic oxide as well. Reaction with Water. Aluminium oxide does not react with water and does not dissolve in it because ions are held too strongly in the solid lattice to react with water. Reaction with Acids. Aluminium oxide will react with hot dilute hydrochloric acid to give aluminium chloride solution. Al₂O₃ + 6HCl → 2AlCl₃ + 3H₂O. Reaction with Bases. With hot, concentrated sodium hydroxide solution, aluminium oxide reacts to give a colourless solution of sodium tetrahydroxoaluminate. Al₂O₃ + 2NaOH + 3H₂O → 2Na[Al(OH)₄]. (d) Silicon dioxide (SiO₂). Reaction with water. It is insoluble in water because of the difficulty of breaking up the large and giant covalent structure. Reaction with Bases. It has got an acidic character. It reacts with hot and concentrated sodium hydroxide to form sodium silicate. SiO₂ + 2NaOH (hot and conc.) → Na₂SiO₃ + H₂O. It also reacts with basic metal oxides (Na₂O, K₂O, CaO, PbO, ZnO or mixture of oxides) forming silicates and glasses. (e) Phosphorus (V) oxide (P₄O₁₀). Reaction with Water. Phosphorus (V) oxide reacts violently with water to give a solution containing a mixture of acids, the nature of which depends on the conditions. We usually consider one of these, phosphoric (V) acid, H₃PO₄ (also known as phosphoric acid or as orthophosphoric acid). P₄O₁₀ + 6H₂O → 4H₃PO₄. Reaction with Base. As it is acidic, it reacts with NaOH as follows: NaOH + H₃PO₄ → NaH₂PO₄ + H₂O. 2NaOH + H₃PO₄ → Na₂HPO₄ + 2H₂O. 3NaOH + H₃PO₄ → Na₃PO₄ + 3H₂O. When phosphorus (V) oxide reacts with sodium hydroxide solution, we would end up with the same possible salts rather than making the acid first. 12NaOH + P₄O₁₀ → 4Na₃PO₄ + 6H₂O. (f) Sulphur oxides (SO₂ and SO₃). Sulphur has two oxides i.e., sulphur dioxide, (SO₂), and sulphur trioxide, (SO₃). (i) Sulphur dioxide (SO₂). Reaction with Water. Sulphur dioxide is fairly soluble in water. It reacts to give a solution of sulphurous acid, H₂SO₃. SO₂ + H₂O ⇌ H₂SO₃. Reaction with Base. As it is acidic, it reacts with NaOH and CaO as follows: CaO + SO₂ → CaSO₃. (ii) Sulphur trioxide (SO₃). Reaction with water. Sulphur trioxide reacts violently with water to produce a fog of concentrated sulphuric acid droplets. SO₃ + H₂O → H₂SO₄. Reaction with Base. Sulphur trioxide itself will also react directly with bases to form sulphates. For example, it will react with Sodium hydroxide and calcium oxide to form sodium sulphate and calcium sulphate, respectively. 2NaOH + SO₃ → Na₂SO₄ + H₂O. CaO + SO₃ → CaSO₄. (g) Chlorine oxides (Cl₂Oₓ). Chlorine forms several oxides, but the only two are chlorine (VII) oxide, Cl₂O₇, and chlorine (I) oxide, Cl₂O are given here. Chlorine (VII) oxide is also known as dichlorine heptoxide, and chlorine (I) oxide as dichlorine monoxide. (i) Chlorine (VII) oxide. Chlorine (VII) oxide is the highest oxide of chlorine. In this oxide, chlorine is in its maximum oxidation state of +7. It continues the trend of the highest oxides of the Period 3 elements towards being stronger acids. Reaction with Water. Chlorine (VII) oxide reacts with water to give the very strong acid, chloric (VII) acid - also known as perchloric acid. The pH of typical solutions will, like sulphuric acid, be around 0. Cl₂O₇ + H₂O → 2HClO₄. Reaction with Base. Chlorine (VII) oxide reacts with sodium hydroxide solution to give a solution of sodium chlorate(VII). 2NaOH + Cl₂O₇ → 2NaClO₄ + H₂O. Chloric (VII) acid itself also reacts with sodium hydroxide solution to form the same product. NaOH + HClO₄ → NaClO₄ + H₂O. (ii) Chlorine (I) oxide. Reaction with Water. Chlorine (I) oxide is far less acidic than chlorine (VII) oxide. It reacts with water to some extent to give chloric(I) acid, HOCl - also known as hypochlorous acid. Cl₂O + H₂O ⇌ 2HOCl. Reaction with Base. Chloric (I) acid reacts with sodium hydroxide solution to give a solution of sodium hypochlorite. NaOH + HOCl → NaOCl + H₂O. Chlorine (I) oxide also reacts directly with sodium hydroxide to give the same product. 2NaOH + Cl₂O → 2NaOCl + H₂O. Table 13.3: Properties of the oxides of elements in period 3. 1. What is the nature of bonds in the oxides formed when Na, Mg, Al and S react with excess oxygen? 2. How do these oxides react with (i) Water (ii) dilute acids, (iii) alkali. 13.1.5 Chlorides of the Period 3 Elements. In this topic, the structures of the chlorides of the Period 3 elements (sodium to sulphur), their physical properties and their reactions with water will be brought under discussion. Sodium Chloride, NaCl. Sodium chloride is a simple ionic compound consisting of a giant array of sodium and chloride ions having strong electrostatic forces of attraction between the positive and negative ions. Therefore, it needs a lot of heat energy to break, so sodium chloride has high melting and boiling points. It does not conduct electricity in the solid state but is a conductor in aqueous state or molten state. Sodium chloride simply dissolves in water to give a neutral solution (hydration). NaCl(s) + H₂O(l) → Na⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq). Magnesium Chloride, MgCl₂. Magnesium chloride is also ionic and a lot of heat energy is needed to overcome the strong electrostatic forces of attractions between the ions, and so the melting and boiling points are high. Solid magnesium chloride is a non-conductor of electricity because the ions are not free to move. However, it is a conductor in molten state and in aqueous solution. Magnesium chloride dissolves in water to give a faintly acidic solution of pH approximately 6. (hydrolysis). When magnesium ions are broken off from the solid lattice and go into solution, there is enough attraction between the Mg²⁺ ions and the water molecules to form co-ordinate covalent bonds to form hexaaquamagnesium ions [Mg(H₂O)₆]²⁺ and Chloride ions. MgCl₂ + 6H₂O → [Mg(H₂O)₆]²⁺ + 2Cl⁻. Aluminium Chloride, AlCl₃. Solid aluminium chloride does not conduct electricity at room temperature because the ions are not free to move. Molten aluminium chloride (only possible at increased pressures) does not conduct electricity because there are not any ions any more. The aluminium chloride reacts with water to form hexaaquaaluminium ions and chloride ions. AlCl₃(s) + 6H₂O(l) → [Al(H₂O)₆]³⁺ + 3Cl⁻. As this reaction is exothermic, heat released is used to break the O-H bond of water molecule, so steamy fumes of hydrogen chloride gas is formed. AlCl₃ + 3H₂O → Al(OH)₃ + 3HCl. This explains why aqueous aluminium chloride is acidic. Silicon Tetrachloride, (SiCl₄). Silicon tetrachloride is a colourless liquid and forms a simple covalent structure. It contains weak Vander Waals forces so low boiling liquid. It does not conduct electricity because having no mobile electrons. If we add water to silicon tetrachloride, there is a violent reaction to produce silicon dioxide and steamy fumes of hydrogen chloride. SiCl₄ + 2H₂O → SiO₂ + 4HCl. The Phosphorus Chlorides (PCl₃ and PCl₅). There are two phosphorus chlorides - phosphorus(III) chloride, (PCl₃), and phosphorus(V) chloride, (PCl₅). Phosphorus (III) Chloride (PCl₃). Phosphorus trichloride is a simple covalent fuming liquid, containing Vander Waals dispersion forces. It does not conduct electricity because it has no free electrons. Phosphorus (III) chloride reacts violently with water to form phosphorous acid, H₃PO₃, and fumes of hydrogen chloride. PCl₃ + 3H₂O → H₃PO₃ + 3HCl. Phosphorus (V) Chloride (PCl₅). Phosphorus (V) chloride is a simple covalent white solid which sublimes at 163°C. As we increase the temperature, it dissociates reversibly to give PCl₃ and Cl₂. PCl₅ ⇌ PCl₃ + Cl₂. Solid phosphorus (V) chloride contains ions that’s why it is solid at room temperature. The formation of the ions involve two molecules of PCl₅. PCl₅ + PCl₅ ⇌ [PCl₄]⁺ + [PCl₆]⁻. Phosphorus (V) chloride has a violent reaction with water producing fumes of hydrogen chloride. The reaction occurs in two stages. In the first, with cold water, phosphorus oxychloride, POCl₃, is produced along with HCl. PCl₅ + H₂O → POCl₃ + 2HCl. If the water is boiling, the phosphorus (V) chloride reacts further to give phosphoric (V) acid and more HCl. POCl₃ + 3H₂O → H₃PO₄ + 3HCl. Disulphur dichloride, (S₂Cl₂). It is a simple covalent liquid (orange and smelly), containing Vander Waals forces. It does not conduct electricity because of lack of free electrons. Disulphur dichloride reacts slowly with water to produce a complex mixture of hydrochloric acid, sulphur, hydrogen sulphide and various sulphur containing acids and anions (negative ions). Table 13.4: Shows various properties of the chlorides of the elements in the third period. A. Considering table No. 13.4 and answer the following questions: (1) How do the states of chlorides at 20°C vary across the third period? (2) How do the boiling points of the chlorides vary across the period? (3) How do conductivity of the molten chlorides vary across the period? B. (1) Which of the following give acidic solution with water MgCl₂, AlCl₃, SiCl₄, NaCl? (2) Why NaCl has high melting and boiling point? (3) Why PCl₃ is a liquid while PCl₅ is solid? (4) What products are obtained on reaction of disulphur dichloride with water? (5) Why AlCl₃ is non-conductor in solid as well as in liquid state but NaCl and MgCl₂ are conductor in liquid state and non-conductor in solid state? C. Magnesium chloride is a high melting point solid, aluminum chloride is a solid which sublimes readily at about 180°C and silicon tetrachloride is a volatile liquid. Explain the nature of the chemical bonding in these chlorides and show how this accounts for the above differences in volatility. 13.1.6 Hydroxides of the Period 3 Elements. This topic consists on the brief account, how the chemistry of the "hydroxides" of the Period 3 elements from sodium to chlorine varies, across the period. Sodium and magnesium hydroxides are ionic compounds and are simple basic hydroxides. Both react with acids to form salts. For example, with dilute hydrochloric acid, colourless solution of sodium chloride or magnesium chloride are formed. NaOH + HCl → NaCl + H₂O. Mg(OH)₂ + 2HCl → MgCl₂ + 2H₂O. Aluminium hydroxide, like aluminium oxide, is amphoteric (both basic and acidic properties). With dilute hydrochloric acid, a colourless solution of aluminium chloride is formed. Al(OH)₃ + 3HCl → AlCl₃ + 3H₂O. But aluminium hydroxide also has an acidic side character. It will react with sodium hydroxide solution to give a colourless solution of sodium tetrahydroxoaluminate. Al(OH)₃ + NaOH → NaAl(OH)₄. Hydroxides of Si, P, S and Cl have hydroxides -OH groups covalently bonded to the atoms. These compounds are all acidic ranging from the very weakly acidic silicic acids to the very strong sulphuric or Chloric acids. There are other acids (also containing -OH groups) formed by these elements, but these are the ones where the Period 3 element is in its highest oxidation state. Orthosilicic acid is very weak. Phosphoric(V) acid is a weak acid - although somewhat stronger than simple organic acids like ethanoic acid. Sulphuric acid and chloric (VII) acids are both very strong acids. Quick Quiz 4. 1. Justify the basic nature of NaOH and Mg (OH)₂ by using chemical equations. 2. Justify with equations that Al (OH)₃ is an amphoteric compound. 13.2 GROUP I ELEMENTS (ALKALI METALS). 13.2.1 Atomic and Physical Properties of the Group I Elements (Alkali Metals). This section explores the trends in some atomic and physical properties of the Group I elements - lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium and caesium. 1. Trends in Atomic Radius. As we move from lithium to caesium, an extra shell of electrons is added to each element. Due to the increase in shielding effect, the effective nuclear charge decreases down the group. We find, therefore, that there is an increase of atomic and ionic radii (of M⁺ ions) as we move from lithium to caesium. This can be seen in the table 13.5. Table 13.5 Some Physical Properties of Alkali Metals. 2. Trends in First Ionization Energy. The first ionization energy falls as we go down the group. We know that alkali metals have only one electron in their outermost shell (ns¹ electron). This ns¹ electron is so weakly held with the nucleus that it can be removed very easily. Alkali metals, therefore, have low ionization energies. As the distance of ns¹ electron from the nucleus increases, on moving from Li to Cs, its removal becomes more and more easy i.e. the amount of energy (ionization energy) used in the removal of ns¹ electron is maximum in case of Li and minimum in case of Cs. The first ionization energy of alkali metals are shown in the table 13.5. The second ionisation energy is fairly high, since the loss of the second electron from M⁺ cation which has a noble gas configuration is quite difficult (size of M⁺ is smaller than M). 3. Trends in Electronegativity. Because of this electropositive character, these metals have very little electronegative character. Therefore, we can say that alkali metals are the least electronegative and their electronegativity values decrease down the group (due to the increase in size of atom) (Table 13.5). 4. Trends in Melting and Boiling Points. We see that both the melting points and boiling points fall as we go down the Group. (Table 13.5.) The melting and boiling points are very low because of the presence of weak metallic bonds (fewer no of free electrons) in the solid state of the alkali metals. 5. Trends in Density. The densities of alkali metals are quite low due to the large atomic volumes. Li, Na and K are lighter in atomic size from Li to Cs. K however is, lighter than Na which is due to an unusual increase in atomic size of K. (Table 13.5). Quick Quiz 5. 1. Why is K lighter than Na? 2. Explain that 2nd ionization energy is greater than 1st ionization energy for alkali metals. 3. Why are melting points of alkali metals low? 13.2.2 Trends in Reactivity with Water. The reaction of alkali metals with water is highly exothermic. A small piece of Li, Na and K floats on water. They react vigorously and liberate metal hydroxide and hydrogen gas. These reactions are highly exothermic. The energy which is produced can burn the hydrogen gas. It is for this reason that alkali metals are stored in kerosene or paraffin oil. 2Na + 2H₂O → 2NaOH + H₂ ΔH = -ve. The reactivity of alkali metals with water becomes more and more vigorous as we move down the group. K, Rb and Cs are so reactive with water that they react with ice at – 100°C. 13.2.3. Reactions with Oxygen. Alkali metals react with O₂, or air rapidly and thus get tarnished due to the formation of their oxide. Li when burnt in O₂, mainly gives lithium monoxide, (normal oxide) Li₂O. 4Li + O₂ → 2Li₂O. Na burnt with golden yellow flame in O₂ forms sodium peroxide, Na₂O₂. 2Na + O₂ → Na₂O₂. Other alkali metals (M = K, Rb, Cs) react with O₂ to form super oxide of MO₂ type. Since the normal oxides of alkali metals other than that of Li (Li₂O) are not formed by the direct reaction between the metals and O₂, they are formed by indirect methods, e.g. by reducing peroxides, nitrite and nitrates with the metals itself. 2Na₂O₂ + 4Na → 4Na₂O. 2NaNO₂ + 6Na → 4Na₂O + N₂. 2NaNO₃ + 10Na → 6Na₂O + N₂. Properties: Normal oxides (O²⁻) react with H₂O to form hydroxides by proton exchange. O²⁻ + H₂O ⇌ OH⁻ + OH⁻. The peroxides (O₂²⁻) and superoxides (O₂⁻) are strong oxidising agents and react with H₂O to give H₂O₂ and O₂. Peroxides: O₂²⁻ + 2H₂O → 2H₂O₂. Superoxides: 2O₂⁻ + 2H₂O → 2H₂O₂ + O₂. Reactions of the Oxides with Water and Dilute Acids. I. The simple oxides, M₂O. Reaction with Water. The simple oxides react with water to give metal hydroxide. For example, lithium oxide reacts with water to give a colourless solution of lithium hydroxide. M₂O + H₂O → 2MOH ; Li₂O + H₂O → 2LiOH. Reaction with dilute Acids. The simple oxides react with an acid to give a salt and water. For example, sodium oxide will react with dilute hydrochloric acid to give colourless sodium chloride solution and water. M₂O + 2HCl → 2MCl + H₂O ; Na₂O + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H₂O. II. The peroxides, M₂O₂. Reaction with Water. If the reaction is done in ice cold water (and the temperature controlled so that it does not rise even though these reactions are strongly exothermic), a solution of the metal hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide is formed. If the temperature increases (as it inevitably will unless the peroxide is added to water very slowly), the hydrogen peroxide produced decomposes into water and oxygen. The reaction can be very violent overall. 2H₂O₂ → 2H₂O + O₂. Reaction with dilute Acids. These reactions are even more exothermic than the ones with water. A solution containing a salt and hydrogen peroxide is formed. The hydrogen peroxide will decompose to give water and oxygen if the temperature rises again, it is almost impossible to avoid this. III. The Superoxides, MO₂. Reaction with Water. When superoxides react with water, a solution of the metal hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide is formed, but oxygen gas is given off as well. Once again, these are strongly exothermic reactions and the heat produced will inevitably decompose the hydrogen peroxide to water and more oxygen. Reaction with dilute Acids. When these oxides react with HCl, a solution containing a salt and hydrogen peroxide is formed together with oxygen gas. The hydrogen peroxide will again decompose into water and oxygen as the temperature rises. 13.2.4 Reactions of the Alkali metals with Chlorine. Alkali metals react with halogens (chlorine) to give halides (chlorides). Li and Na react slowly with chlorine at room temperature to give LiCl and NaCl. Molten Na burns with a brilliant yellow flame in the atmosphere of chlorine to form NaCl. 2Na + Cl₂ → 2NaCl. K, Rb and Cs react vigorously with all the halogens to form metal halides. 13.2.5. Effect of heat on Nitrates and Carbonates. The carbonates (M₂CO₃) are highly stable to heat. With increase of electropositive character from Li to Cs, the stability of these salts increases. Their nitrates decompose on strong heating to the corresponding nitrite and O₂, (Exception is LiNO₃). 4LiNO₃ → 2Li₂O + 4NO₂ + O₂. 2NaNO₃ → 2NaNO₂ + O₂. Quick Quiz 6. 1. Give trend of stability of carbonates of alkali metals along the group. 2. Why are alkali metals stored in kerosene / paraffin oil? 13.2.6 Flame Tests. A flame test is an analytical procedure used to detect the presence of certain metal ions, based on each element’s characteristic emission spectrum. Flame tests are used to identify the presence of a relatively small number of metal ions in a compound. Not all metal ions give flame colours. Procedure. Clean a platinum or nichrome (a nickel-chromium alloy) wire by dipping it into concentrated hydrochloric acid and then heat it in a hot Bunsen flame until the wire does not produce any colour in the flame. When the wire is clean, moisten it again with some of the acid and then dip it into a small amount of the solid to be tested. Place the wire back in the flame again, an intense flash of colour is imparted to the flame. Different colours shown by different elements are given below. Elements: Li - crimson red; Na - golden yellow; K - violet; Rb - reddish-violet; Cs - Blue; Ca - brick red; Sr - crimson red; Ba - pale green/grassy green; Cu - blue-green (often with white flashes); Pb - greyish-white. The Origin of Flame Colours. When an alkali or alkaline earth metal or any of their compound is heated in a Bunsen flame, the electrons get excited to higher energy levels. These electrons on de-excitation, release the excitation energy in the form of light in the visible region of the spectrum. Since the amount of energy absorbed during the excitation process is different in different atoms, different colours are imparted by the atoms to the flame. Quick Quiz 7. 1. Write electronic configuration for alkali metal atoms. 2. Explain periodicity in ionisation energy, electronegativity and atomic radii on passing from Li to Rb. 3. Explain the following: a) Alkali metals show an oxidation state +1 only. b) Alkali metals are good reducing agents. c) Alkali metals have low melting points. d) Alkali metals give characteristic colour to the Bunsen flame. e) Na is stored under kerosene oil. f) Alkali metals form M⁺ cations instead of M²⁺ cations. g) Alkali metals have low ionisation potentials. 13.3 GROUP II ELEMENTS (Alkaline Earth Metals). 13.3.1 Atomic and Physical Properties. This section explores the trends in some atomic and physical properties of the Group II elements - beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium and radium. 1. Trends in Atomic Radius. We can see that the atomic radius increases as we go down the Group. Reason: As we go down the group, extra shells are added and the atomic volume increases from Be to Ra. With the increase of atomic volume, the atomic and ionic radii (of M²⁺ ions) also increase from Be to Ra. The atomic radii of these elements are, however, smaller than those of alkali metals in the same period. This is due to the fact that the alkaline earth metals have higher nuclear charge which tends to draw the orbit electrons towards the nucleus. The smaller values of atomic radii result in that the alkaline earth metals are harder, have higher densities and higher melting points than alkali metals. Table 13.6: Some physical properties of alkaline earth metals. 2. Trends in First Ionization Energy. The first ionisation energy decreases down the group. Reason: The first and second ionisation energies of these elements decreases with the increase of atomic radii from Be to Ba. However, the values for Ra is slightly higher than those of Ba (for values see table no 13.6). 3. Trends in Electronegativity. The electronegativity values fall as we go down the group (table 13.6), because of the increase of atomic radii from Be to Ba. 4. Trends in Melting Point and Boiling Point. The melting and boiling points of group II elements are higher than group I elements. The reason is that the group II elements have stronger metallic bond due to the presence of two valence electrons. Anyhow there is no regular trend present which can be observed. 13.3.2 Trends in Reactivity with Water. The group II metals become more reactive towards water as we go down the group. For example: Beryllium: Beryllium has no reaction with water or steam even when red hot. Magnesium: Magnesium burns in steam to produce white magnesium oxide and hydrogen gas. Mg(s) + H₂O(g) → MgO(s) + H₂(g). Very clean magnesium ribbon has a very slight reaction with cold water. After several minutes, some bubbles of hydrogen form on its surface, and the coil of magnesium ribbon usually floats to the surface. However, the reaction soon stops because the magnesium hydroxide formed is almost insoluble in water and forms a protective layer on the magnesium preventing further reaction. Mg(s) + 2H₂O(l) → Mg(OH)₂(s) + H₂(g). Calcium, Strontium and Barium: They react with cold water with increasing vigour to give the metal hydroxide and hydrogen. Strontium and barium have reactivities similar to lithium in Group I of the Periodic Table. Calcium, for example, reacts fairly vigorously with cold water in an exothermic reaction. Bubbles of hydrogen gas are given off, and a white precipitate (of calcium hydroxide) is formed, together with an alkaline solution as; Ca + 2H₂O → Ca(OH)₂ + H₂. 13.3.3 Reactions with Oxygen and Nitrogen. I. Reactions of the Group 2 Elements with Air or Oxygen. (a) Formation of Simple Oxides. Preparation: The alkaline earth metals form the normal oxides (MO) which are obtained by heating the metal in O₂, or by heating their carbonates at high temperature e.g. 2Ca + O₂ → 2CaO. CaCO₃ (heat) → CaO + CO₂. Properties: (i) These white crystalline oxides are extremely stable due to their high crystal lattice energy. (ii) BeO and MgO are quite insoluble in H₂O while CaO, SrO and BaO react with H₂O to give soluble hydroxides, M(OH)₂ which are strong bases. (iii) BeO is not at all basic in nature; in fact, it is amphoteric since it reacts with acids to form salts and with alkalis to give beryllates. BeO + 2HCl → BeCl₂ + 2H₂O. BeO + 2NaOH → Na₂BeO₂ + 2H₂O. The oxides of other metals are basic in character. Their basic character increases down the group. (iv) Due to the small size of Be²⁺ ion, BeO is covalent while other oxides are ionic. Although BeO is covalent yet it has a higher melting point and is harder than the oxides of other metals as it is polymeric. Each Be atom is tetrahedrally coordinated by four oxygen atoms. (b) Peroxides: Preparation: The peroxides of heavier metals (Sr, Ba etc.) can be obtained on heating the normal oxides with O₂ at high temperature. 2BaO + O₂ (High Temp.) → 2BaO₂. Properties: The peroxides are white, ionic solids having peroxide anion, [O-O]²⁻. They react with acids to produce H₂O₂. BaO₂ + H₂SO₄ → BaSO₄ + H₂O₂. II. Reactions of the Group II element with Nitrogen. All the elements burn in nitrogen to form nitrides, M₃N₂ e.g. 3Ca + N₂ → Ca₃N₂. These metal nitrides react with H₂O to liberate NH₃ e.g. Ca₃N₂ + 6H₂O → 3Ca(OH)₂ + 2NH₃. Be₃N₂ is volatile while other nitrides are non-volatile. 13.3.4 Trends in Solubility of the Hydroxides, Sulphates and Carbonates. I. Solubility of the Hydroxides. Group II metal hydroxides become more soluble as we go down the group because the lattice energy decreases down the group due to the increase in size. Be(OH)₂ and Mg(OH)₂ are almost insoluble in H₂O while the hydroxides of other metals are slightly soluble. Magnesium Hydroxide is insoluble and shows slightly alkaline nature in water. Suspension of Mg (OH)₂ is called milk of magnesia. It is used to remove stomach acidity. Calcium Hydroxide solution is used as "lime water". 1 litre of pure water will dissolve about 1 gram of calcium hydroxide at room temperature. Barium Hydroxide is soluble enough to be able to produce a solution with a concentration of around 0.1 mol dm⁻³ at room temperature. II. Solubility of the Sulphates. The sulphates become less soluble as we go down the Group e.g., BeSO₄ and MgSO₄ are fairly water soluble, calcium sulphate is sufficiently soluble in water while strontium and Barium sulphates are almost insoluble. III. Solubility of the Carbonates. The carbonates tend to become less soluble as we go down the Group. Carbonates are insoluble in water and therefore occur as solid rock minerals in nature. However, they dissolve in H₂O containing CO₂ due to the formation of bicarbonates. 13.3.5. Trends in Thermal Stability of the Carbonates and Nitrates. The effect of heat on the Group 2 Carbonates. All carbonates decompose on heating at appropriate temperature evolving CO₂. MCO₃ → CO₂ + MO. The stability of the carbonates of these metals increase on moving down the group. This is illustrated by the values of the decomposition temperatures of these carbonates as given below: BeCO₃ = 25°C, MgCO₃ = 540°C, CaCO₃ = 900°C, SrCO₃ = 1290°C, BaCO₃ = 1360°C. Reason: Cations of group II elements have smaller sizes and greater charge densities than the cations of group I elements. The cations of small size and high charge densities have greater ability to distort or polarize the carbonate ion and hence facilitate its decomposition. Thus the carbonates of group I are more stable than group II carbonates. The effect of heat on the Group II Nitrates. All the nitrates in this Group undergo thermal decomposition to give the metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxygen e.g., 2Mg (NO₃)₂ → 2MgO + 4NO₂ + O₂. 2Ba (NO₃)₂ → 2BaO + 4NO₂ + O₂. The nitrates are white solids, and the oxides produced are also white solids. Brown nitrogen dioxide gas is given off together with oxygen. Magnesium and calcium nitrates normally have water of crystallisation, and the solid may dissolve in its own water of crystallisation to make a colourless solution before it starts to decompose. Thermal stability of nitrates increases down the group. 13.3.6. How Beryllium Differ from other Members of its Group? Beryllium, the first element of the group, differs from rest of alkaline earth metals due to its small atomic size and comparatively high electronegativity. The main points of difference are: 1. Hardness: Beryllium is the hardest of all the elements of its group. 2. Melting and Boiling Points: The melting and boiling points of beryllium are the highest. 3. Formation of Covalent Compounds: Beryllium has a tendency to form covalent compounds. Thus when it reacts with other elements, the electronegativity difference is not so large and the bond is therefore covalent. 4. Reaction with Water: Beryllium does not react with water even at high temperature. Other alkaline earth metals decompose water liberating H₂ gas. Mg + H₂O → MgO + H₂. 5. Reaction with Hydrogen: Beryllium does not react with hydrogen directly to form its hydride. Its hydride however has been prepared indirectly. The rest of the alkaline earth metals combine with hydrogen to form hydrides. The hydrides of Be and Mg are covalent, whereas the hydrides of other metals are ionic. M + H₂ → MH₂. 6. Reaction with Alkalis: Beryllium reacts with alkalis to form hydrogen gas. Be + 2NaOH → Na₂BeO₂ + H₂. Other alkaline earth metals do not react with alkalis. 7. Behaviour of Oxides and Hydroxides: The oxides and hydroxides of beryllium are amphoteric, i.e. dissolve both in acids and alkalis to form salts. BeO + 2HCl → BeCl₂ + H₂O. BeO + 2NaOH → Na₂BeO₂ + H₂O. The oxides and hydroxides of other group II elements are basic. 8. Behaviour of Carbides: Beryllium carbide is decomposed by water to form methane (CH₄). Be₂C + 4H₂O → 2Be(OH)₂ + CH₄. The carbide of other alkaline earth metals are decomposed by water to form acetylene (C₂H₂). For example: CaC₂ + 2H₂O → Ca(OH)₂ + C₂H₂. 9. Behaviour of Nitrides: Be₃N₂ is volatile while the nitrides of other alkaline earth metals are non-volatile. 10. Number of Molecules of Water of Crystallisation: The salts of Be²⁺ ion cannot have more than four molecules of water of crystallisation while other alkaline earth metals have more than four molecules of water of crystallisation because in case of Be²⁺ ion there are only four orbitals. One orbital can accept lone pairs of electrons donated by O-atoms on each of the water molecules. On the other hand, other alkaline earth metals like Mg can extend their coordination number to six by using one 3s, three 3p and two 3d orbitals belonging to their outermost shell. 11. Formation of Complex Compounds: Be²⁺ ion, on account of its small size, forms stable complex compounds like [BeF₃]⁻, [BeF₄]²⁻ while M²⁺ ions derived from other alkaline earth metals form very few complex compounds. Quick Quiz 8. 1. Explain the following: a. Alkaline earth metals form M²⁺ ions but not M⁺ ions. b. Alkaline earth metals have high first and second ionisation potential yet these metals form M²⁺ ions instead of M⁺ ion. c. Beryllium salts have never more than four molecules of water of crystallisation. d. The solubility of the sulphates of alkaline earth metals decreases whereas the solubility of their hydroxides increases on moving down the group. e. The thermal stability of carbonates of alkaline earth metals increases with atomic numbers. f. Alkaline earth metal salts impart colour to the Bunsen flame. g. MgSO₄ is more soluble in water than BaSO₄. 2. How do the elements of group IIA differ from alkali metals? 3. Explain the following. a. The hydroxides of group IIA metals are weaker bases than those of group IA metals. b. The carbonates of group IIA metals are less stable to heat than those of group IA metals carbonates. c. KOH is stronger base than Ba(OH)₂. d. Li₂CO₃ is unstable while other alkali metal carbonates are relatively more stable. 13.4 GROUP IV ELEMENTS (CARBON FAMILY). 13.4.1 Physical Properties of the Elements. Melting Points and Boiling Points. As we move down the group from C to Pb, the melting points as well as boiling points generally decrease, decrease in melting points as well as in boiling points indicate that inter-atomic forces also decrease in the same direction. The melting and boiling points of C and Si are notably high because of the tendencies of these elements to form giant covalent molecules. The low value for tin's melting point compared with lead is presumably due to forming a distorted 12 co-ordinated structure rather than a pure one. The tin values in the chart refer to metallic white tin. 13.4.2 The Trend from Non-Metal to Metal in the Group IV Elements. The change from non-metallic to metallic character with the increase in atomic number is the best illustrated by the elements of this group. The first two elements i.e C and Si are distinctly non-metals, although electrical properties of Si are like those of a semi-metal (i.e a metalloid); the third element i.e Ge is partly a metal and partly a non-metal, while the last two elements i.e. Sn and Pb are distinctly metals. Thus: C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb. Non-metals, Metalloid, Metals. Metallic Character increases. The change from non-metallic to metallic character with the increase in atomic number is due to the decrease in effective nuclear charge and an increase in the size of the atoms. 13.4.3 Oxidation State. The elements of group IVA exist in two oxidation states +2 and +4. In carbon and silicon compounds the +4 state is very stable relative to +2. The +2 state is rare and easily oxidized to +4. The steady increase in the stability of the lower oxidation state relative to the higher oxidation state on moving down the group from carbon to lead is due to inert pair effect. 13.4.4 Possible Oxidation States; (a). Inert pair effect and positive oxidation states: Carbon and silicon show +4 oxidation states while Ge, Sn and Pb show +2 and +4 oxidation states. When only two np electrons from the ns²np² configuration are lost, we get the elements in +2 oxidation states. The ns² electron pair remains inert and does not take part in bond formation. This pair of ns² electrons is called inert pair of electrons and the effect is called inert pair effect. Since in the group the stability of +2 oxidation state also increases from Ge²⁺ to Pb²⁺ i.e. Ge²⁺ < Sn²⁺ < Pb²⁺. Oxidizing and reducing properties: When all the four ns²np² electrons are lost, M⁴⁺ cations are formed. On descending the group stability of +4 oxidation state decrease i.e. the stability of M⁴⁺ cations decrease from Ge⁴⁺ to Pb⁴⁺ i.e. Ge⁴⁺ > Sn⁴⁺ > Pb⁴⁺. Compounds of Ge²⁺ are less stable than those of Ge⁴⁺. Hence the compounds of Ge²⁺ are readily oxidised into Ge⁴⁺. In other words, compounds of Ge²⁺ act as strong reducing agents while those of Ge⁴⁺ act as oxidising agents. Ge²⁺ compounds → Oxidation → Ge⁴⁺ compounds (Less stable, Reducing agent). Ge⁴⁺ compounds → Reduction → Ge²⁺ compounds (More stable, Oxidising agent). On similar grounds it can be shown that the compounds of Sn²⁺ are less stable than those of Sn⁴⁺. In other words, compounds of Sn²⁺ act as strong reducing agents while those of Sn⁴⁺ act as oxidising agents. Sn²⁺ compounds → Oxidation → Sn⁴⁺ compounds (Less stable, Reducing agent). Sn⁴⁺ compounds → Reduction → Sn²⁺ compounds (More stable, Oxidising agent). When we compare the stability of the compounds of Pb⁴⁺ and Pb²⁺ ions, we find that Pb⁴⁺ compounds are less stable than those of Pb²⁺ (PbCl₄). Hence the compounds of Pb⁴⁺ are readily changed (reduced) into those of Pb²⁺. In other words, compounds of Pb⁴⁺ act as strong oxidising agents while those of Pb²⁺ act as reducing agents. Pb⁴⁺ compounds → Reduction → Pb²⁺ compounds (Less stable, Oxidising agent). Pb²⁺ compounds → Oxidation → Pb⁴⁺ compounds (More stable, Reducing agent). The stability of M⁴⁺ and M²⁺ cations of Ge, Sn and Pb, are as follows: Ge²⁺ < Ge⁴⁺; Sn²⁺ < Sn⁴⁺; Pb²⁺ > Pb⁴⁺. (b). Negative Oxidation State. Since the electronegativities of these elements are low, they do not have much tendency to form the negative ion. However, carbon forms C⁴⁻ and C₂²⁻ ions in certain compounds, e.g. Na₄C (Na⁺ and C⁴⁻ ions), CaC₂ (Ca²⁺ and C₂²⁻ ions). (c) Nature of M²⁺ and M⁴⁺ compounds (Fajan Rule). The nature of the compounds of M²⁺ and M⁴⁺ cations can be predicted by Fajan’s rule which states that: “The smaller cation with high charge density makes the bond more covalent.” The members of group IVA elements show M²⁺ and M⁴⁺ oxidation states. Therefore, these members can form covalent as well as ionic bonds depending upon the size of cation. According to Fajan’s rule, molecules containing M²⁺ ions (low charge density) are ionic in nature, while compounds containing M⁴⁺ ions (high charge density) are covalent in nature. Example SnCl₂ and SnCl₄. Sn⁴⁺ ion is smaller than Sn²⁺, the compounds of Sn⁴⁺ are covalent in nature while those of Sn²⁺ are ionic. Similarly Pb⁴⁺ compounds are covalent and those of Pb²⁺ are ionic. The tendency of given cations to form ionic compounds increases down the group. 13.4.5 The Chlorides of Carbon, Silicon and Lead. Carbon, Silicon and Lead Tetrachlorides. These all have the formula XCl₄. They are all simple covalent molecules with a typical tetrahedral shape. All of them are liquids at room temperature. (Although at room temperature, lead(IV) chloride will tend to decompose to give lead(II) chloride and chlorine gas). PbCl₄ → PbCl₂ + Cl₂ (white solid). Stability. At the top of Group 4, the most stable oxidation state shown by carbon and silicon is +4 in CCl₄ and SiCl₄ and have no tendency to decompose into dichlorides (in +2 Oxidation state). The thermal stability of the chlorides of group IVA decreases down the group. Reaction with water (hydrolysis). Actually the hydrolysis of tetra halides takes place through the following two steps: 1st step: In this step, oxygen atoms of H₂O which acts as an electron donor, attack the central atoms to form a coordinate bond with it and thus produces an unstable intermediate compound MX₄·4H₂O. 2nd step: In this step, four HX molecules are eliminated from this unstable intermediate compound and hydroxide of the central element is formed. Thus X atoms of MX₄ molecule are replaced by OH ions. The tetrahalides of C are not hydrolysed while those of Si, Ge and Sn get readily hydrolysed: Reason: We know that C atom being a member of second period of the periodic table, has no d-orbitals in its valence shell and hence is unable to accommodate the lone pair donated by the donor oxygen atom of H₂O molecule to form an unstable intermediate compound. Thus the tetrahalides of C are not hydrolysed. On the other hand, Si, Ge and Sn have vacant d-orbitals which can accept the lone pair and thus their tetrahalides get readily hydrolysed. Trends: The ease with which the tetrahalides are hydrolysed by H₂O decreases from Si to Sn as the metallic character of the central atom increases in this order. Thus GeX₄ and SnX₄ tetrahalides are less readily hydrolysed than SiX₄ tetrahalides. It may be mentioned here that empty orbitals are always available with any atom and they can be utilised if sufficient energy is provided for the reaction to occur, e.g., CCl₄ undergoes hydrolysis when superheated steam is used. CCl₄ + H₂O (superheated steam) → COCl₂ + 2HCl (Phosgene gas). Hydrolysis of tetrahalides of Pb follows essentially the same pattern but due to the instability of tetravalent compounds of Pb, some decomposition of PbCl₄ to PbCl₂ also takes place. PbCl₄ is hydrolysed by H₂O as follows: PbCl₄ + 2H₂O → PbO₂ + 4HCl. Complex formation: Except carbon, the tetrahalides of Si, Ge, Sn and Pb react with halide ions and form the hexahalo complex ions like [SiF₆]²⁻, [GeX₆]²⁻. SiF₄ + 2F⁻ → [SiF₆]²⁻. 13.4.6 Oxides. The elements of group IVA form three types of oxides i.e., Monoxides (MO type oxides); Dioxide (MO₂ type); other oxides like C₃O₂, Pb₃O₄, PbO, PbO₂ etc. But we will discuss only the structural differences between carbon dioxide and silicon dioxide, and the trends in acid-base behaviour of the oxides as we go down Group IV. The Structures of Carbon Dioxide and Silicon Dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a gas whereas silicon dioxide is a hard and high melting point solid. The other dioxides in Group IV are also solids. The Structure of Carbon Dioxide: 1. It is a triatomic simple covalent molecule. 2. It has two double bonds between carbon and oxygen atoms. 3. Carbon is sp-hybridized and oxygen is sp²-hybridized. 4. The molecule of CO₂ is linear and net dipole moment is zero. 5. The solid CO₂ has a face-centred cubic structure. 6. The bond lengths between carbon and oxygen have values 115 pm. 7. All three atoms have completed their octet. So the molecule of CO₂ is stable. The Structure of Silicon Dioxide: Silicon dioxide forms a giant covalent structure in which each silicon and oxygen atom is linked together covalently in tetrahedral basic unit. Because of its structure silicon dioxide is non-volatile and hard solid unlike carbon dioxide. Both these oxides show a lot of difference in their physical properties. It is due to the fact that: (1) Silicon atoms are much larger in size than carbon atoms and thus tend to be surrounded by more oxygen atoms. (2) Silicon forms only single bond with oxygen atoms while carbon forms double bonds. (3) Carbon dioxide forms a simple molecular structure containing weak Vander Waal’s forces. Whereas in silicon dioxide, each silicon atom is bonded with four oxygen atoms in a tetrahedral structure. Silicon dioxide forms a giant covalent structure containing strong covalent bonds throughout the network, which need a lot of energy to break. The simplest formula for silica is SiO₂. However, the whole crystal of silicon dioxide can be considered as one molecule. The Acid-Base Behaviour of the Group IV Oxides. The oxides of the elements at the top of Group IV are acidic, but acidity of the oxides falls as we go down the Group. The oxides become more basic as we move down the group. The trend is, therefore, from acidic oxides at the top of the Group towards amphoteric ones at the bottom. Carbon and Silicon Oxides. Carbon Monoxide: Carbon monoxide is usually treated as if it is a neutral oxide. But in fact it is very, very slightly acidic. It does not react with water but it will react with hot concentrated sodium hydroxide solution to give a solution of sodium methanoate. NaOH + CO → HCOONa. Carbon and Silicon Dioxides: These are both weakly acidic. With Water: Silicon dioxide does not react with water, because of the difficulty of breaking up the giant covalent structure. Carbon dioxide reacts with water, to a slight extent, to produce hydrogen ions (strictly, hydroxonium ions) and hydrogencarbonate ions. H₂O(l) + CO₂(aq) ⇌ H⁺(aq) + HCO₃⁻(aq). With Bases: Carbon dioxide reacts with sodium hydroxide solution at low temperature to give either sodium carbonate or sodium hydrogencarbonate solution, depending on the concentration of reactants. 2NaOH + CO₂ → Na₂CO₃ + H₂O. NaOH + CO₂ → NaHCO₃. Silicon dioxide also reacts with sodium hydroxide solution when hot and concentrated. Sodium silicate solution is formed. 2NaOH + SiO₂ → Na₂SiO₃ + H₂O. Calcium oxide reacts with silicon dioxide to produce a liquid slag, calcium silicate. CaO(s) + SiO₂(s) (heat) → CaSiO₃(l) (Slag). Germanium, Tin and Lead Oxides. I. The Monoxides: They have general formula XO, where (X = Ge, Sn, Pb). All of these oxides are amphoteric. The Basic Nature of the Oxides: These oxides react with acids to form salts. XO + 2HCl(aq) → XCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l) (Where X can be Ge and Sn). Example: Lead (II) oxide reacts with dilute HCl and forms an insoluble layer of lead (II) chloride over the lead (II) oxide and stops the reaction as: PbO(s) + 2HCl(aq) → PbCl₂(s) + H₂O(l). But when we use Conc. HCl insolubility disappears and [PbCl₄]²⁻ complex is formed, which is soluble in water. PbCl₂(s) + 2Cl⁻(aq) → [PbCl₄]²⁻(aq). The Acidic Nature of the Oxides: All of these oxides also react with bases like sodium hydroxide solution. XO(s) + 2NaOH(aq) → Na₂XO₂(aq) + H₂O(l). II. The Dioxides: They have general formula XO₂, where (X = Ge, Sn, Pb). These dioxides are again amphoteric - showing both basic and acidic properties. The Basic Nature of the Dioxides: The dioxides react with concentrated hydrochloric acid first to give compounds of the type XCl₄: XO₂(s) + 4HCl(aq) → XCl₄(aq) + 2H₂O(l). XCl₄ will react with excess chloride ions in the hydrochloric acid to give complexes such as [XCl₆]²⁻. XCl₄ + 2Cl⁻ → [XCl₆]²⁻. In case of lead (IV) oxide, the reaction has to be done with ice-cold hydrochloric acid. In warm condition, the lead (IV) chloride decomposes to give lead (II) chloride and chlorine gas. This is an effect of the preferred oxidation state of lead being +2 rather than +4. PbCl₄ → PbCl₂ + Cl₂. The Acidic Nature of the Dioxides: The dioxides will react with hot concentrated sodium hydroxide solution to give soluble complexes of the form [X(OH)₆]²⁻. Quick Quiz 9. 1. Give the trend of conductivity of group IV elements. 2. Which of the following metals are semiconductors Pb, C, Si, Ge? 3. Arrange following cation in increasing order of their stability. Sn²⁺, Sn⁴⁺, Ge⁴⁺, Pb⁴⁺. 13.5 GROUP VII ELEMENTS (HALOGENS). 13.5.1 Atomic and Physical Properties. 1. Trends in Atomic Radius. Atomic radius increases as we go down the group due to the increase in number of shells, greater shielding effect. 2. Trends in Electronegativity. Halogens have large values of electronegativity. These values decrease as we proceed from F to I in the group. Large electronegativity values of halogen atoms indicate that they have a strong tendency to form halide ions. 3. Trends in Electron Affinity (E.A). Halogens have high electron affinities which decrease from chlorine to iodine. Chlorine in the group has the highest electron affinity. The lower value of E.A for F is due to its small size and interelectronic repulsion between the electron added and electrons already present (i.e compact 2p orbital of F atom). 4. Trends in Melting and Boiling Points. The melting and boiling points of the halogens regularly increase from F₂ to I₂. Halogens contain instantaneous dipole induce dipole forces. These attractive forces between molecules become progressively more prominent as the molecules increase in size and mass. This effect is also reflected in the physical states of halogens. F₂ and Cl₂ are gases at ordinary temperature, Br₂ is a heavy liquid while I₂ is a solid. 5. Bond enthalpies (bond energies or bond strengths). Bond enthalpy is the heat needed to break one mole of a covalent bond to produce individual atoms. For example: Cl-Cl(g) → 2Cl(g). For bromine, the reaction is still from gaseous bromine molecules to separate gaseous atoms. Br-Br(g) → 2Br(g). Bond enthalpy in the halogens, X₂. The bond enthalpies of the Cl-Cl, Br-Br and I-I bonds fall just as we would expect, but the F-F bond is deviated from the sequence. Reason: Due to the very small size of fluorine atom in F₂ molecule, repulsions between the non-bonding electrons is very large as compared to other halogens. This makes the F atoms in F₂ molecule repel each other and helps in the dissociation of F₂ molecule into F atoms. That is why the bond enthalpy of F₂ is less than expected. Bond Enthalpies in the Hydrogen Halides, HX. As the halogen atom gets bigger, the bonding pair gets more and more distant from the nucleus. The attraction becomes less, and the bond gets weaker and can easily be broken down. 13.5.2 Strength of Halogens as Oxidising Agents: The halogens due to high electron affinity values have a great tendency to accept electron and hence acts as strong oxidising agent. The oxidising property of a halogen molecule, X₂ is represented by; ½X₂ (s,l,g) + e⁻ + H₂O → X⁻(aq) + Energy. It has been seen that the values of E.A are decreasing from fluorine to iodine. The oxidising power of halogens is also decreasing in the same direction i.e. the oxidising power of halogen is in the order: F₂>Cl₂>Br₂>I₂. Since F₂ is the strongest oxidising agent in the series, it will oxidise other halide ions to halogens in solution or when dry, i.e., F₂ displaces other halogens from their corresponding halides. For example. F₂ + 2X⁻ → 2F⁻ + X₂. Similarly Cl₂ will displace Br⁻ and I⁻ ions from their solutions and Br₂ will displace I⁻ ions from their solutions. Cl₂ + 2X⁻ → 2Cl⁻ + X₂. Br₂ + 2I⁻ → 2Br⁻ + I₂. 13.5.3 The Acidity of the Hydrogen Halides. All the halogen acids in the gaseous state are essentially covalent but in the aqueous solution they ionise to give solvated proton (H₃O⁺) and hence acts as acids. H₂O + HX → H₃O⁺ + X⁻. HF ionises only slightly while HCl, HBr, and HI ionise completely. Hence HF is the weakest acid and strength of these acids increase from HF to HI, i.e. HF < HCl < HBr < HI (weakest acid) (strongest acid). Acidic character of HX increases from HF to HI. As we move down the group, size of halogen atom increases which causes the decrease in forces of attraction between H and X. so the ability to release proton (H⁺) increases which makes the acid strong. 13.5.4 Halide Ions as Reducing Agents and Trends in Reducing Strength. Ability of Halide Ions (The Redox Reactions between Halide Ions and Concentrated Sulphuric Acid). (i) With Chloride Ions: The chloride ions will not reduce the concentrated sulphuric acid. 2NaCl + H₂SO₄ → Na₂SO₄ + 2HCl. (ii) With Bromide Ions: Bromide ions are strong reducing agents and reduce the concentrated sulphuric acid. In this process, the bromide ions are oxidised to bromine. The oxidation state of sulphur decreases from +6 in the sulphuric acid to +4 in the sulphur dioxide. (iii) With Iodide Ions: Iodide ions are stronger reducing agents than bromide ions. They are oxidised to iodine by the concentrated sulphuric acid. 8NaI + 4H₂SO₄ → 4Na₂SO₄ + 8HI. 8HI + H₂SO₄ → 4I₂ + H₂S + 4H₂O. The iodide ions reduce H₂SO₄ to H₂S. Thus, the oxidation state of sulphur decreases from +6 to -2. Trends in reducing strength: The reducing ability of the halide ions increases as we go down the group; F⁻ < Cl⁻ < Br⁻ < I⁻. When a halide ion acts as a reducing agent, it has to lose electrons, itself. The bigger the halide ion, the farther the outer electrons are from the nucleus, and the more they are screened from it by inner electrons. It, therefore, gets easier for the halide ions to lose electrons as we go down the group because there is less attraction between the outer electrons and the nucleus. Quick Quiz 10. 1. Give reasons of the following: (a) HI is stronger acid than HF. (b) Electron affinity of fluorine is less than chlorine. (c) The iodide ions are powerful reducing agent. 2. Give reasons for the following; (a) Chlorine is a stronger oxidising agent than iodine. (b) Fluorine is better oxidising than chlorine. (c) Electronegativity of halogens decreases in the order F > Cl > Br > I. Society, Technology and Science: Food and Beverage Canning. As early as 1940, can manufacturers began to explore adapting cans to package carbonated soft drinks. Even small amounts of dissolved tin or iron from the can could impair the drinking quality of both beer and soft drinks. Fortunately, beer, which is only mildly acidic, is relatively noncorrosive. In addition, beer ages naturally, so it has a limited shelf life of about three months in any package. In contrast, the food acids, including carbonic, citric and phosphoric, in soft drinks present a risk for rapid corrosion of exposed tin and iron in the can. The consequences of off-flavors, color changes and leakage through the metal needed to be addressed. At this point, the can was upgraded by improving the organic coatings used to line the inside, making cans heavier and more encasing. Elements/Metals — Their Mining and Extraction. Different elements/metals are obtained after passing through different steps. These steps are discussed as follows: 1. Mining and enrichment, 2. Reduction, 3. Refining and Casting. In fact, some special methods are used to obtain each metal from its ores and to develop it into useful articles. Yet a few steps are common in the metallurgy of every metal. Which are follows: 1. Mining: Obtaining ores by digging the rocks and hills is called mining. This work is done by engineers and laborers with the help of machines. But prior to this work it is confirmed by survey and analysis that obtaining metals from this is economical or not. 2. Crushing: Breaking of rocks and larger stones into smaller size stones is called crushing. This is done by jaw crushers. 3. Grinding: The crushed ore is grinded in grinding machines. 4. Hand Picking, Jugging and Shaking: In Pakistan and other under developed countries where labour is cheap, metallic stones are picked and separated by hands. Heavy metals are separated from useless material i.e. gangue, by shaking with “chaage”. In some countries this process is done by pressurized water. 5. Magnetic Separation: The ground ore is passed over a magnetic belt which separates the magnetic metal from gangue. This process is used for metals, which have magnetic properties like iron. Reduction: For the complete separation of a metal from gangue, ores are heated at high temperature. At its melting point, molten metal is separated from solid gangue. The process of reduction is carried out in the blast furnace. Blast Furnace: It is lined inside with fire bricks. Its height and capacity are kept according to the requirement. Hot gases enter from lower side and ores are charged from the top of the furnace. Temperature is maintained at 1500°-3000°C. This furnace is usually used for iron and copper metallurgy. 3. Refining of Metals: Metals extracted in the above process are further refined by the following process. Open-Hearth Process: A fire furnace is used to remove the impurities of metal. It is lined inside with fire bricks and is just like a room. Burning gases are entered from one side and exhaust gases are removed from the opposite end. The process is operated from opposite ends after an interval. Metals melt in a shorter time by this two way heating. Applications of Bleaching Powder. Bleaching powder is actually a mixture of calcium hypochlorite Ca(OCl)₂ and the basic chloride CaCl₂·H₂O with some slaked lime, Ca(OH)₂. 1. Bleaching powder is highly effective for cleaning inside the home and outdoors. It can be used for removing mildew from fabric, cleaning countertops and for removing mold from grout between tiles, bathmats and shower curtains. 2. Bleaching powder can be used to disinfect safely and sterilize many things around the home including second hand goods, trash cans, pet accessories and baby toys and furniture. 3. Bleaching powder is used for the disinfection of drinking water or swimming pool water. 4. Bleaching powder is used for bleaching cotton and linen. It is also used in bathroom cleaners, household disinfectant sprays, moss and algae removers, and weed killers. 5. Bleaching powder may be used to manufacture chloroform. 6. Bleaching powder is used also in sugar industry for bleaching sugar cane juice before its crystallization. Commercial Uses of Halogens. 1. Chlorine is used as a cheap industrial oxidant in bromine manufacturing. 2. Iodine is dissolved in alcohol, commonly known as tincture iodine is used as a mild antiseptic for cuts and scratches. Iodine is also mixed with the detergents used in cleaning dairy equipment. 3. Fluorine is also used to make a wide range of fluorocarbon compounds for use as refrigerants, aerosol propellants, anaesthetics and fire-extinguisher fluid. One of the most important fluorocarbons is poly (tetrafluoroethene), PTFE, frequently sold under the trade name Teflon. Iodine Deficiency and Goiter. Iodine Deficiency: Iodine is an element that is needed for the production of thyroid hormone. The human body cannot synthesize iodine, so it is an essential element. The deficiency of iodine leads to enlargement of thyroid a condition called goiter. Hypothyroidism and mental retardation in children and infants is observed if their mothers suffer from iodine deficiency during pregnancy. Before 1920, iodine deficiency was common in Appalachian, north-western US regions, and in most of Canada. Approximately, 40% of the world’s population remains at the risk of iodine deficiency. Goiter: The term goiter refers to the abnormal enlargement of thyroid gland due to deficiency of iodine in diet. It results in swelling in neck. It is important to know that the presence of goiter does not necessarily mean that the thyroid gland is malfunctioning (hypothyroidism). A goiter can also occur in a gland that is producing too much thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism) or even the correct amount of hormone (euthyroidism). A goiter indicates that there is a condition present which is causing the thyroid to grow abnormally. Fluoride Deficiency and Toxicity. Fluoride Toxicity: Fluoride toxicity or fluoride poisoning is a condition in which more fluoride is taken than the amount required for normal growth, development and metabolism. Fluoride toxicity is characterised by a variety of signs and symptoms. Poisoning most commonly occurs following ingestion of conspicuous amount of fluoride containing products. Symptoms appear within minutes of exposure. Fluoride is found in many common household products e.g. toothpaste, dietary supplements, insecticides, rodenticides etc. fluoride toxicity results: 1. Arthritis, 2. Stiff painful joints with or without swelling, 3. Asthma, especially after showering, 4. Painful bony lumps where tendons and ligaments attach to bones. Fluoride Deficiency: Fluoride deficiency results when the amount of its uptake is less than required. Fluoride deficiency results in Brittle bones or demineralization of bones, Cavities, Weakened tooth enamel. Fluoride deficiency can lead to a higher likelihood of developing bone fractures and possibly even osteoporosis. Halogens and their compounds are used for bleaching, refrigeration and as aerosols, etc. Key Points: Alkali metals have only one electron in s-orbital of their valence shell. They lose one electron of the valence shell forming monovalent positive ions. Alkaline earth metals have two electrons in s-orbital of their valence shell and they lose two electrons forming dipositive ions M²⁺. Lithium behaves differently from the other alkali metals. Beryllium is the only member of group II which reacts with alkalis to give hydrogen. The other members do not react with alkalis. Nitrates of lithium, magnesium and barium on heating give oxygen, nitrogen dioxide and the corresponding metallic oxides. The pair of outermost electrons that does not readily take part in chemical combination is termed as inert pair. The electronic configuration of group IV elements show that they have four electrons in their valence shells, two electrons of which are in s-orbital and the remaining two are in p-orbitals. The halogens are very reactive. Intermolecular forces in halogens increase down the group, fluorine is a gas but iodine is solid. Halogens form ionic compounds with s-block metals, covalent compound with p-block elements and complex ions with d-block metals. Fluorides are usually ionic. Halogens show oxidation states -1, +1, +3, +5, +7 but fluorine shows the oxidation state of -1 only.