hydrocarbons_2ndchem_fed

After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Classify hydrocarbons as aliphatic and aromatic. Describe nomenclature of alkanes, cycloalkanes, alkenes, alkynes and benzene. Describe the mechanism of free radical substitution in alkanes exemplified methane and ethane. Describe the structure and reactivity of alkanes as exemplified by ethane. Describe the chemistry of alkenes by the following reaction of ethene. Describe what is meant by the term delocalized electrons in the context of the benzene ring. Describe addition reactions of benzene and methyl benzene. Describe the mechanism of electrophilic substitution in benzene. Describe the preparation of alkynes using elimination reactions. Describe acidity of alkynes. Describe and differentiate between substitution and addition reactions. Explain the shapes of alkanes and cycloalkanes exemplified by ethane and cyclopropane. Explain unreactive nature of alkanes towards polar reagents. Explain what is meant by a chiral center and show that such a center gives rise to optical isomerism. Explain shape of ethane molecule in terms of sigma and pi C-C bonds. Explain dehydration of alcohols and dehydrohalogenation of RX for the preparation of ethene. Explain the shape of benzene molecule (molecular orbital aspect). Explain isomerism in alkanes, alkenes, alkynes and substituted benzene. Define homolytic and heterolytic fission, free radical initiation, propagation and termination. Identify organic redox reaction. Define and explain with suitable examples the terms isomerism, stereoisomerism and structural isomerism. Define resonance, resonance energy and relative stability. Hydrogenation, hydrohalogenation, hydration, halogenation, halohydration, epoxidation, ozonolysis, polymerization. Compare the reactivity of benzene with alkanes and alkenes. Compare the reactivity of alkynes with alkanes, alkene and arenes. Discuss chemistry of benzene by nitration, sulphonation, halogenation, Friedal Craft’s alkylation and acylation. Discuss the shape of alkynes in terms of sigma and pi C-C bonds. Discuss chemistry of alkynes by hydrogenation, hydrohalogenation, hydration, bromination, ozonolysis, and reaction with metals. Apply the knowledge of position of substituents in the electrophilic substitution of benzene. Definition. "Organic compounds which contain carbon and hydrogen only are called hydrocarbons." The ability of carbon atoms to attach with each other to form a chain or ring is called Catenation. 16.1 TYPES OF HYDROCARBONS. Hydrocarbons have been divided into various classes on the basis of their structure as shown below: Hydrocarbons: Open Chain or Acyclic Hydrocarbons and Closed Chain or Cyclic Hydrocarbons. Open Chain Hydrocarbons: Saturated Hydrocarbons (Alkanes) e.g. CH₄ Methane; Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: Alkenes e.g. H₂C=CH₂ Ethene; Alkynes e.g. HC≡CH Ethyne. Closed Chain or Cyclic Hydrocarbons: Alicyclic Hydrocarbons e.g. Cyclohexane; Aromatic Hydrocarbons e.g. Benzene. Open Chain Hydrocarbons. The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms attach with each other to form open chains are called open chain hydrocarbons. Types: 1. Saturated hydrocarbons: (Alkanes or Paraffins). 2. Unsaturated hydrocarbons: (Alkenes or Olefins) and (Alkynes or Acetylenes). Explanation and Examples: (1) Saturated Hydrocarbons: These are the hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are attached with each other through single bonds. Each carbon atom is sp³ hybridized. For example, Alkanes. These may have straight chain or branched chain. CH₃-CH₂-CH₂-CH₂-CH₃ pentane (Straight Chain). CH₃-CH(CH₃)-CH₂-CH₃ 2-Methyl butane (Branched Chain). No further atoms or groups of atoms can be attached to the carbon atoms of such hydrocarbons. This is why they are known as saturated hydrocarbons. (2) Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: These are the hydrocarbons which contain double or triple bonds. For example, alkenes and alkynes. (i) Alkenes or Olefins: These are the unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain carbon- carbon double bond (C=C). CH₂=CH-CH₂-CH₂-CH₃ 1-pentene (Straight Chain). CH₂=CH-CH(CH₃)-CH₃ 3-Methyl-1-butene (Branched Chain). (ii) Alkynes or acetylenes: These are the unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain carbon — carbon triple bond (C≡C). HC≡CH Ethyne. HC≡C-CH₃ Propyne. Closed Chain Hydrocarbons: These are the hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms attach with each other to form rings. Types: These hydrocarbons are of two types. 1. Alicyclic Hydrocarbons. 2. Aromatic Hydrocarbons. (1) Alicyclic Hydrocarbons: Non-benzenoid cyclic hydrocarbons are alicyclic hydrocarbons. Alicyclic hydrocarbons possess two hydrogen atoms less than their corresponding open chain hydrocarbons. Cyclopropane, cyclobutane, cyclopentane, cyclohexane. (2) Aromatic Hydrocarbons: Those hydrocarbons which contain at least one benzene ring are known as aromatic hydrocarbons. In these compounds all the carbon atoms present in the ring are sp² hybridized. Benzene, which is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon, has a regular hexagonal structure — with alternate single or double bonds between carbon atoms. Toluene (methylbenzene), o-Xylene (1,2-dimethylbenzene). Quick Quiz 1. 1. What are hydrocarbons? 2. Why saturated hydrocarbons are called paraffins? 3. Why unsaturated hydrocarbons are called olefins? 16.2 ALKANES AND CYCLOALKANES. Alkanes. Simplest organic molecules with only C and H atoms. Commercially important as fuels and oils. These contain carbon-carbon single bond. 16.2.1. Nomenclature. The I.U.P.A.C rules of naming alkanes are as:- 1. Select a longest continuous chain of carbon atoms as parent chain. 2. If there are two or more chains of equal lengths, the chain with larger number of branches is selected as main chain. 3. Number the main chain starting from the end nearest to the substituent. 4. When two identical substituents are present at equal distance from either end, number the chain starting with end which gives their minimum sum of the number of carbon atoms containing branches. 5. The position of substituent is indicated by the number of C-atom to which it is attached. The number is prefixed to the name of group separated by hyphen. 6. Names of alkyl groups are written before the name of parent hydrocarbon in alphabetical order. 7. When two or more similar groups are present, their numbers are indicated by prefixes di-, tri-, tetra-, etc. Their numbers are grouped together and are separated by commas. Example: 3-Ethyl-2,3,5-trimethyl hexane. 8. If two identical groups appear at the same C-atom, the number is written twice, separated by commas. Example: 2,2-Dimethyl Pentane. The structural formula and names for the simple alkanes are shown in the following table. Number of C atoms: 1 = CH₄ methane; 2 = C₂H₆ ethane; 3 = C₃H₈ propane; 4 = C₄H₁₀ butane; 5 = C₅H₁₂ pentane; 6 = C₆H₁₄ hexane; 7 = C₇H₁₆ heptane; 8 = C₈H₁₈ octane; 9 = C₉H₂₀ nonane; 10 = C₁₀H₂₂ decane. Quick Quiz. 1:- Name each of the following compounds according to IUPAC System. (a) CH₃-CH(CH₃)-CH₂-CH(CH₃)-CH₃. (b) (CH₃)₃C-CH₂-CH₃. (c) CH₃-CH₂-CH(CH₂-CH₃)-CH₂-CH₃. (d) CH₃-CH₂-CH(CH₃)-CH₂-CH₃. 2:- Indicate what is wrong with each of the following names. Give the correct IUPAC name if possible. (a) 2-Dimethyl propane (should be 2-methylpropane). (b) 2,2,3-Methyl butane (should be 2,2,3-trimethylbutane). (c) 3,3-Dimethyl-5,5-dimethyl heptane (should be 3,3,5,5-tetramethylheptane). (d) 2,4-Diethyl pentane (should be 3-ethyl-5-methylheptane). (e) 2,2-Diethyl-4,4-dimethyl pentane (should be 4,4-dimethyl-2,2-diethylpentane). (f) 3-Ethyl-4-methyl pentane (should be 3-ethyl-4-methylpentane). 3:- Write the structures of the following compounds. (a) Neoheptane (2,2-dimethylpentane). (b) Isoheptane (2-methylhexane). (c) Trimethyl ethyl methane (2,2-dimethylbutane). (d) Dimethyl ethyl isopropyl methane (2,2,3-trimethylbutane). (e) Dimethyl propyl ethyl methane (3-ethyl-2-methylpentane). (f) 3-Ethyl hexane (3-ethylhexane). 16.2.2 Physical Properties: (a) Methane to Butane (C₁ — C₄) is colorless, odorless gases while pentane to heptadecane (C₅ to C₁₇) is colorless, odorless liquids. The higher members from C₁₈ onwards are waxy solids, which are also colorless and odorless. (b) Alkanes are non-polar or very weakly polar and are insoluble in polar solvents like water, but soluble in non-polar solvents like benzene, ether, carbon tetrachloride, etc. (c) The melting points, boiling points, density etc increase with the increase in number of carbon atoms, whereas solubility decreases with the increase in mass. The boiling points increases by 20 to 30°C for addition of each CH₂ group to the molecule. However the boiling points of alkanes, having branched chain structures are lower than their isomeric normal chain alkanes, e.g. n-butane has a higher boiling point (-0.4°C) than iso-butane (-10.2°C). 16.2.3. Isomerism in alkane. The molecular formula for the C₁ to C₃ alkanes lead to single, unique structures. C₄H₁₀ has two possible isomers: n-butane CH₃-CH₂-CH₂-CH₃, ΔHf = -125.6 kJ/mol, b.pt. = -0.4°C. Isobutane CH₃-CH(CH₃)-CH₃, ΔHf = -135.6 kJ/mol, b.pt. = -10.2°C. C₅H₁₂ has three possible isomers: n-pentane, ΔHf = -154.1 kJ/mol, b.pt. = 36°C. Isopentane, ΔHf = -154.1 kJ/mol, b.pt. = 30°C. Neopentane (CH₃)₄C, ΔHf = -168.0 kJ/mol, b.pt. = 9.5°C. 16.2.4. Relative Stability. Branched alkanes are more stable than linear alkanes, e.g. 2-methylpropane is more stable than n-butane. 16.2.5 Reactivity of alkane. The Alkanes or Paraffins are inert towards acids, alkalies, oxidizing and reducing agents under normal conditions. Explanation: The un-reactivity of Alkanes can be explained on the basis of inertness of a σ bond and non-polar C-H/C-C bonds. (i) Inertness of σ bond: In a σ-bond the electrons are very tightly held between the nuclei. A lot of energy is required to break it. Moreover, the electrons present in a σ-bond can neither attack on any electrophile nor a nucleophile can attack on them. Hence Alkanes are less reactive. (ii) Non-polar Bonds: The electronegativity of carbon (2.5) and hydrogen (2.1) do not differ appreciably and the bonding electrons between C-H and C-C are equally shared making them almost nonpolar. The ionic reagents (polar compounds) such as acids, alkalies, oxidizing agents have no reaction with alkane molecules. However, under suitable condition, Alkanes give two types of reactions. (1) Thermal and Catalytic Reactions. (2) Substituted Reactions. These reactions take place at high temperature or on absorption of light energy through the formation of highly reactive free radicals. II. Cycloalkanes. Another type of molecule containing only sp³ hybridized C and H atoms connected by single bonds is possible with a ring of 3 or more C atoms are called cycloalkanes. They have a general formula of CₙH₂ₙ, having two hydrogen atoms less as compare to analogous alkane. 1. Nomenclature. According to IUPAC system, cyclo alkanes with one ring are named by prefixing cyclo to the name of the corresponding alkane having the same number of carbon atoms as the ring, e.g. Cyclopropane, cyclobutane, cyclopentane, cyclohexane. The substituents are numbered in such a way that the sum of numbers is kept minimum, e.g. Methyl cyclopropane, 1,2-dimethyl cyclobutane, 1,3-dimethyl cyclohexane. If the alicyclic hydrocarbon is unsaturated, the rules applied to alkenes (for double bond) or alkynes (for triple bond) are used, e.g. Cyclopentene, cyclo-1,4-hexadiene, cyclo-1,3-pentadiene. Multiple bonds are given the lowest possible number. 2. Physical Properties. Like alkanes, the low polarity of all the bonds in cycloalkanes means that the only intermolecular forces between molecules of cycloalkanes are the very weak induced dipole forces, also known as London forces which are easily overcome. Like alkanes, cycloalkanes also have low melting and boiling points. 3. Reactivity. The reactivity of lower cycloalkanes are closely related with alkanes. Since C and H atoms have very similar electronegativities, both the C-H and C-C bonds are non-polar. As a result, cycloalkanes, like alkanes, are not a very reactive functional group. 4. Bond fission. A covalent bond may break either homolytically or heterolytically. 1. Homolytic fission: When a chemical bond is broken in such a way that each of the two bonded atoms acquires one of the bonding electrons is called homolytic fission. Example: Cl-Cl (UV-light) → Cl• + Cl• (Chlorine free radical). 2. Heterolytic fission: When a chemical bond is broken in such a way that one of the bonded atoms acquires both of the bonded electrons, it is called heterolytic fission. Example: H-Cl → H⁺ + Cl⁻. Quick Quiz 2. 1. What are isomers? 2. What are inert compounds? 3. What is sigma bond? 16.3 RADICAL SUBSTITUTION REACTIONS. 16.3.1 Halogenation reaction. Substitution of halogen to an alkane gives an alkyl halide. R-H + X-X (heat/light) → R-X + HX. Example: CH₄ + Br₂ (heat/light) → CH₃Br + HBr. Alkane R-H relative reactivity order: 3° > 2° > 1° > methyl. Halogen reactivity F₂ > Cl₂ > Br₂ > I₂. Only chlorination and bromination are useful in the laboratory. Reaction proceeds via a free radical chain mechanism. Mechanism (Photo chemical). It is a photo chemical reaction, proceed through free radical mechanism and consists of the following three steps. Step 1 (Initiation): Heat or uv light or sunlight cause the weak halogen bond to undergo homolytic cleavage to generate two bromine free radicals which initiate the reaction. Step 2 (Propagation): A bromine free radical attacks on hydrogen atom of methane to form HBr and a methyl free radical. The methyl free radical attacks on bromine atom of another molecule of Br₂ to form the methyl bromide product and bromine free radical. Br• + CH₄ → HBr + •CH₃. •CH₃ + Br₂ → CH₃Br + Br•. In this reaction when one free radical is terminated another is formed. Therefore it is called propagation step. Step 3 (Termination): In this step the various free radicals are terminated as: •CH₃ + •CH₃ → CH₃-CH₃. Br• + Br• → Br₂. Br• + •CH₃ → CH₃Br. 16.4 OXIDATION AND REDUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS. Oxidation, [O], and reduction, [R], are opposites and both must occur simultaneously, hence redox reactions. Organic chemists will normally describe a reaction as either oxidation or reduction depending on the fate of the major organic component. Oxidation: Addition of Oxygen, formation of C-O bond. (or more electronegative atom than C). Removal of Hydrogen. loss of electrons. increase in oxidation state, e.g. +1 to +3. Reduction: Addition of Hydrogen (formation of C-H bonds). Removal of oxygen (or other atoms more electronegative than C). gain of electrons. decrease in oxidation state, e.g. +1 to -1. 16.5 ISOMERISM. Compounds having same molecular formula but different chemical structures are called isomers and the phenomenon is called isomerism. Since isomers have the same molecular formula, the difference in their properties must be due to different modes of combination or arrangement of atoms within the molecule. There are two main types of isomerism: (1) Stereoisomerism (2) Structural Isomerism. Stereoisomerism: When isomerism is caused by the different arrangements / orientation of atoms or groups in space, the phenomenon is called Stereoisomerism. The stereoisomers have the same molecular and structural formulas but differ in arrangement of atoms in space. In other words stereoisomer is exhibited by such compounds which have the same structural formula but differ in configuration, (The term configuration refers to the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms that characterizes a particular compound). Stereoisomerism is of two types: (a) Optical Isomerism (b) Geometrical or Cis-Trans Isomerism. 16.5.1 Chiral Center. Chirality is a property present in an object that cannot be superimposed on its mirror image. Chiral objects or chiral molecules do not have a plane of symmetry, i.e., they are asymmetric. Chirality is typically seen in molecules that have a chiral or asymmetric carbon atom. Plane of Symmetry: A plane which divides an object into two symmetrical halves, is said to be plane of symmetry. For example, a person or a hat has a plane of symmetry. A person’s hand or gloves lack plane of symmetry. Chiral molecule (or object): An object lacking a plane of symmetry is called dissymmetric or Chiral (pronounced as Ki-ral). A symmetric object is referred to as Achiral. A dissymmetric object cannot be superimposed on its mirror image. Example: A left hand does not possess a plane of symmetry, and its mirror image is not another left hand but a right hand. The two are not identical because they cannot be superimposed. If we were to lay one hand on top of the other, the fingers and the thumb would clash. Chiral molecule has at least one asymmetric center, does not have a plane of symmetry and are not superimposable on their mirror images. Achiral molecule: Achiral molecule has a plane of symmetry and are superimposable on their mirror images. 16.5.2 Carbon-Based Chiral Centres: A carbon atom which is bonded to four different atoms or group of atoms is called an Asymmetric Carbon or chiral carbon. Examples are: Lactic acid, 2-bromobutane, Glyceraldehyde. Molecule containing asymmetrical carbon is called asymmetric (Latin a = without), that is, without symmetry. Presently the term Dissymmetric or Chiral Molecules is often used for asymmetric molecules. 16.5.3. Optical Activity. Ordinary light or sunlight: Light from ordinary electric lamp or sunlight is electromagnetic radiations and is composed of waves vibrating in different planes. Plane polarized light: When monochromatic light is passed through Nicol prism (made of calcite, CaCO₃) or polaroid lens, light is found to vibrate in one plane only. It is said to be plane-polarized or simply polarized light. Optically active compounds and optical activity: Solutions of some organic compounds have the ability to rotate the plane of polarized light. These compounds are said to be Optically Active. This property of a compound is called Optical Activity. Optical activity in a compound is detected and measured by means of a Polarimeter. When a solution of a known concentration of an optically active material is placed in the polarimeter, the beam of polarized light is rotated through a certain number of degrees, either clockwise or anti-clockwise. (a) Optical isomerism. An optically active compound can exist in two isomeric forms which rotate the plane of polarized light in opposite directions. These are called Optical Isomers and the phenomenon is known as Optical Isomerism. The isomer which rotates the plane of polarized light to the right (clockwise direction) is known as Dextrorotatory Isomer or (+) isomer. The isomer which rotates the plane of polarized light to the left (anticlockwise direction) is known as the Levorotatory Isomer or (-) isomer. These isomers are called enantiomers. Diastereomers: Stereoisomers which are not mirror images of each other are called diastereomers. Optical Isomerism of Lactic Acid: Lactic acid (2-Hydroxypropanoic acid) is an example of a compound which shows optical isomerism. It contains one asymmetric carbon atom. Two three dimensional structures are possible for Lactic acid. These structures are not identical because they cannot be superimposed on each other. Such non superimposable mirror image forms are optical isomers and called enantiomers. Thus, three forms of lactic acid are known. Two (+ and – form) are optically active and third one, equimolar mixture of (+) and (-) form is optically inactive called racemic mixture, as it does not rotate the plane of polarized light. Optical Isomerism of Tartaric Acid: Tartaric acid (2,3-Dihydroxybutanedioic acid) contains two asymmetric carbon atoms. Four isomeric forms of tartaric acid are known. (+)Tartaric Acid: It rotates the plane of polarized light to the right (clockwise direction) and is called dextrorotatory. (-) Tartaric Acid: It rotates the plane of polarized light to the left (anticlockwise direction) and is called levorotatory. Meso-Tartaric Acid: It posses a plane of symmetry and is optically inactive. This optically inactive form is internally compensated. Racemic Tartaric Acid: It does not rotate the plane of polarized light. That is, it is optically inactive. It is an equimolar mixture of (+) and (-) forms (racemic mixture). (b) Geometrical Isomerism. Geometrical isomerism (also called cis-trans isomerism) results from a restriction in rotation about double bonds, or about single bonds in cyclic compounds. (I) Geometrical Isomerism in Alkenes: The carbon atoms of the carbon-carbon double bond are sp² hybridized. The presence of the pi bond locks each molecule in one position. The two carbon atoms of the C=C bond and the four atoms that are attached to them lie in one plane and their position in space are fixed. Rotation about pi bond is not possible because it would break the pi bond. This restriction of rotation about the carbon-carbon double bond is responsible for the geometrical isomerism in alkenes. Example: Consider the case of 2-butene. It exists in two special arrangements: cis-2-butene and trans-2-butene. These two compounds are referred to as geometrical isomers and are distinguished from each other by the terms cis and Trans. The cis isomer is one in which two similar groups are on the same side of the double bond. The Trans isomer is that in which two similar groups are on the opposite sides of double bond. Consequently, this type of isomerism is often called cis-trans isomers. Interconversion of cis-trans isomers: The conversion of cis-isomer into trans-isomer or vice versa is possible only if either isomer is heated to a high temperature or absorbs light. The heat supplies the energy (about 62 Kcal/mole) to break the pi bond so that rotation about sigma bond becomes possible. Upon cooling, the reformation of the pi bond can take place in two ways: giving mixture of trans-2-butene plus cis-2-butene. Stability of Isomers: The trans isomers are more stable than the corresponding cis isomers. This is because, in cis isomer, the bulky groups are on the same side of the double bond. The steric repulsion of groups makes the cis isomers less stable than the trans isomer in which the bulky groups are far (they are on the opposite sides of the double bond). The geometrical isomers have different physical and chemical properties. They can be separated by conventional physical techniques like fractional distillation, gas chromatography etc. Conditions for geometrical isomerism: All alkenes do not show geometrical isomerism. Geometrical isomerism is possible only when each of the double bonded carbon atoms is attached to two different atoms or groups. The following examples illustrate this condition for the existence of geometrical isomers. Example 1. Consider the case of Propene: No geometrical isomers are possible for propene (CH₃CH=CH₂). This is because one of the double bonded carbons has two identical groups (H atoms) attached to it. Example 2. Consider the case of 3-Hexene (CH₃CH₂CH=CHCH₂CH₃): As each double bonded carbon atom is attached to two different groups, this compound shows geometrical isomerism. cis-3-Hexene and trans-3-Hexene. Example 3. Consider the case of Butenedioic acid. (HOOC-CH=CH-COOH): trans-butenedioic acid (Fumaric acid) and cis-butenedioic acid (Maleic acid). (II) Geometrical Isomerism in Cyclic Compounds: Geometrical isomerism is also possible in cyclic compounds. There can be no rotation about carbon-carbon single bonds forming a ring because rotation would break the bonds and break the ring. For example 1,2-dimethylcyclopropane exists in two isomeric forms. cis-1,2-dimethylcyclopropane and trans-1,2-dimethylcyclopropane. In cis-1,2-dimethylcyclopropane the two methyl groups are on the same side of the ring. In trans-1,2-dimethylcyclopropane, they are on opposite sides. A requirement for geometrical isomerism in cyclic compounds is that there must be at least two other groups beside hydrogen on the ring and these must be attached on the different carbon atoms in the ring. For example, no geometrical isomers are possible for 1,1-dimethylcyclopropane. 16.6.6 Structural Isomerism. Structural Isomerism: The isomerism which is due to difference in the arrangement of atoms within the molecule is called Structural Isomerism. In other words, structural isomers are compounds that have the same molecular formula but different structural formulas. Structural isomerism is of five types: 1) Chain isomerism; 2) Position isomerism; 3) Functional group isomerism; 4) Metamerism; 5) Tautomerism. 1). Chain Isomerism: Chain isomers have the same molecular formula but different chain of carbon atoms. For example: Pentane (C₅H₁₂): n-pentane, 2-methyl butane (iso-pentane), 2,2-dimethyl propane (neo-pentane). 2). Position Isomerism: Isomers which have same molecular formula but different position of functional groups, C=C or C≡C are called position isomers. Examples: 1-Propanol and 2-Propanol; 1-Butene and 2-Butene. 3) Functional group Isomerism: Functional isomers have the same molecular formula but different functional groups. For example: Molecular Formula C₃H₆O: Acetone and Propionaldehyde. Molecular Formula C₂H₄O₂: Acetic acid and Methyl formate. 4) Metamerism: This type of isomerism is due to the unequal distribution of carbon atoms on either side of the functional group. Members belong to the same homologous series. For example: Molecular Formula C₅H₁₀O: 2-Pentanone and 3-Pentanone. Molecular Formula C₄H₁₀O: Diethyl ether and Methyl propyl ether. 5) Tautomerism: A type of isomerism in which a compound exists simultaneously in two forms in equilibrium with one another. It involves the shifting of position of proton. This type of hydrogen atom is known as “mobile” hydrogen. Example Ethyl acetoacetate ester. Keto-Form ⇌ Enol-Form. Quick Quiz. 1. Define or explain the following terms: (a) Structural isomerism (b) Geometrical isomerism (c) Optical isomerism (d) Asymmetric carbon (e) Chiral molecule. 2. State the necessary condition for a compound to show geometrical isomerism. Illustrate your answer with examples. 3. What is optical activity? how is it measured? 4. Write a note on Optical Isomerism of Lactic acid. 5. Write a note on Optical isomerism of tartaric acid. 6. An acid of formula C₄H₆O₄ is optically active. What is its structure? 7. How does Cis-isomer convert into trans-isomer? 8. The trans-isomer is more stable. Why? 16.5 ALKENES. 16.5.1. Nomenclature. IUPAC system for naming Alkenes are as:- 1) The longest continuous chain of carbon atoms containing double bond is selected as parent chain. 2) The ending ‘ane’ of an alkane is replaced by ‘ene’. 3) The chain is numbered in such a manner as to give minimum possible number to the double bonded C-atoms. 4) The position of double bond is indicated by the lower number of C-atom. 5) The lower number of the double bonded C-atom is placed before the name of parent alkene. 6) The presence of more than one double bond is indicated by the suffix -diene for two double bonds, -triene for three double bonds and so on. 7) Name the substituents before the name of parent hydrocarbon and indicate its position by number. Example: 2-Ethyl-3-methyl-1-butene. Quick Quiz. 1. Name the following Olefins by the IUPAC Systems: (a) CH₃-CH₂-CH=CH-CH₂-CH₃ (3-Hexene). (b) CH₃-C≡C-CH₃ (2-Butyne). (c) CH₂=CH-CH=CH-CH₃ (1,3-Pentadiene). (d) CH₂=C(CH₃)-C(CH₃)=CH-CH₂-CH₃ (2,3-Dimethyl-1,3-pentadiene). (e) CH₃-C≡C-CH₃ (2-Butyne). (f) CH₃-C(CH₃)=CH-C(CH₃)=CH₂ (2,4-Dimethyl-1,3-pentadiene). 2. Write structural formulas for the following compounds and discuss the geometric isomerism in each case. (a) 1,3-Butadiene (CH₂=CH-CH=CH₂). (b) 1,2-Pentadiene (CH₂=C=CH-CH₂-CH₃). (c) 2,4-Hexadiene (CH₃-CH=CH-CH=CH-CH₃). (d) 2-Methyl-1,3-butadiene (CH₂=C(CH₃)-CH=CH₂). (e) 3-Methyl-1,3-pentadiene (CH₂=CH-C(CH₃)=CH-CH₃). 16.5.2. Relative Stability. There are 3 factors that influence alkene stability: 1. Degree of substitution: More highly alkylated alkenes are more stable, so stability of alkenes decreases in the following order: tetra > tri > di > mono-substituted. 2. Stereochemistry: Trans alkenes are more stable than cis alkenes due to reduced steric interactions. 3. Conjugation: Conjugated alkenes are more stable than isolated alkenes. For example: 1,3-pentadiene is more stable than 1,4-pentadiene. 16.5.3 Structure. The carbon atoms linked through π-bond are sp² hybridized. Therefore, each atom carries three sp²-hybrided orbitals and one p-orbital. The p-orbital overlaps side way to form π-bond and hybrid orbitals form σ-bonds due to linear overlap. The carbon-carbon distance in ethene is shorter (1.34Å) than the C-C bond distance of ethane (1.54Å). It is due to increased electron density between carbon atoms. Carbon atoms are coplanar, and the rotation of one C-atom with respect to other is restricted which results in cis-trans isomerism in alkene. 16.5.4. Preparation of Alkenes. 1. Dehydration of Alcohols: Removal of water molecule from an alcohol is called dehydration. Primary alcohol: When vapours of alcohol are passed over heated alumina (dehydrating agent), dehydration takes place with the formation of alkene. R-CH₂-CH₂OH (Al₂O₃, 340-450°C) → R-CH=CH₂ + H₂O. Compounds like P₂O₁₀, H₂SO₄, H₃PO₄ are also used for dehydration. Secondary alcohol: R-CH₂-CH(OH)-CH₃ (H₂SO₄, 140-170°C) → R-CH=CH-CH₃ + H₂O. Tertiary alcohol: R-C(OH)(CH₃)-CH₃ (20% H₂SO₄, 140-170°C) → R-C(CH₃)=CH₂ + H₂O. The ease of dehydration of various alcohols is in the order: Tert.alcohol > sec.alcohol > pri.alcohol. 2. Dehydrohalogenation of Alkyl Halides: Removal of hydrogen and halogen from alkyl halides is called Dehydrohalogenation. Alkyl halides on heating with alcoholic potassium hydroxide undergo Dehydrohalogenation to form alkenes. R-CH₂-CH₂X + KOH (alcohol) → R-CH=CH₂ + KX + H₂O. Example: Bromoethane + KOH (alcohol) → Ethene + KBr + H₂O. 1-Bromopropane + KOH (alcohol) → Propene + KBr + H₂O. 16.5.5 Reactivity. In alkene, the electron density is diffused as compared to alkanes. This is due to π-bonds in alkenes. Since an ethene π-bond is weaker than σ-bond, it requires less energy to break a π-bonds. Alkene undergoes electrophilic addition reactions where there is breaking of π-bond and a new sigma bond is formed. 16.5.6 Electrophilic addition reactions of alkene. 1. Hydrogenation: Addition of hydrogen in alkene in the presence of a catalyst and pressure of 1-5 atm to give a saturated compound is known as catalytic hydrogenation. It is a highly exothermic process and the amount of heat evolved when one mole of an alkene is hydrogenated is called Heat of Hydrogenation. The heat of hydrogenation of most alkene is about 120 kJ mole⁻¹ for each double bond present in a molecule. The catalysts employed are Pt, Pd and Raney Nickel. Raney Nickel: It is prepared by treating a Ni - Al alloy with caustic soda. Ni-Al + NaOH + H₂O → Ni + NaAlO₂ + 3/2 H₂. Example: 3-methyl-1-butene + H₂ (Pt) → 2-methyl butane (iso-pentane). Benzene + 3H₂ (Pt, Pd, Raney Ni/200°C) → Cyclohexane. Catalytic hydrogenation is used for the manufacture of vegetable ghee (saturated compound) from vegetable oils (Unsaturated compound). 2. Hydrohalogenation: Addition of halogen acid to an alkene is known as hydrohalogenation. Alkenes react with aqueous solution of halogen acid to form alkyl halides. The order of reactivity of halogen acids is HI > HBr > HCl. R-CH=CH₂ + HX → R-CHX-CH₃ (Alkyl halide). Example: Ethene + HCl → Ethyl chloride. Mechanism: The addition of a hydrogen halide to an alkene takes place in two steps. (1) Alkene accepts the proton of hydrogen halide to form a carbocation. (2) The carbocation then reacts with the halide ion to form the product. Addition of halogen acid to an unsymmetrical alkene in accordance with the Markownikov’s Rule. Formation of major product is predicted by Markownikov’s Rule. Markownikov’s Rule: This rule states that "In addition of an unsymmetrical reagent to an unsymmetrical alkene, the negative (electronegative) part of the adding reagent goes to that double bonded carbon atom which has the least number of hydrogen atoms". Example: 2-Methyl-1-propene + HBr → 2-Bromo-2-methylpropane (major product, according to Markownikov's Rule) and 1-Bromo-2-methylpropane (not formed). 3. Hydration: Addition of water to alkene is called hydration. Alkenes react with water in the presence of mineral acid to form alcohol. Alkenes on reaction with cold concentrated sulfuric acid form an alkyl hydrogen sulphate. These alkyl hydrogen sulphates on boiling with water decompose to give corresponding alcohols. Example: Ethene + H₂SO₄ → Ethyl hydrogen sulphate. Ethyl hydrogen sulphate + H₂O (100°C) → Ethanol + H₂SO₄. 4. Halogenation: Alkenes react with halogen in an inert solvent like carbon tetrachloride at room temperature to give vicinal dihalides or 1,2 dihaloalkanes. Example: Ethene + Br₂ (CCl₄) → 1,2-Dibromoethane (vicinal dihalide). Br₂ and Cl₂ are effective electrophilic reagents. Fluorine is too reactive to control the reaction. Iodine does not react. Mechanism: (a) A bromine molecule becomes polarized as it approaches the alkene. This polarized bromine molecule transfers a positive bromine atom to the alkene resulting in the formation of a cyclo bromonium ion. (b) The nucleophilic bromide ion then attacks on the carbon of the cyclic bromonium ions to form vicinal dibromide and reddish-brown colour of bromine is discharged. This test is applied for the detection of unsaturation in a molecule. 5. Halohydration: Addition of hypohalous acid (HOX) is called halohydration. Alkenes react with hypohalous acid to give halohydrin. In this reaction, molecules of the solvent become reactants too. Example: Ethene + X₂ + H₂O → Halohydrin + HX (X = Cl or Br). 6. Epoxidation: Peracids such as peroxyacetic acid or peroxy benzoic acid react with alkenes to form epoxides. Thus propylene reacts with peracid to give epoxy propane. Propene + C₆H₅-C(O)-O-OH → Epoxy propane + CH₃COOH. 7. Ozonolysis: Ozone (O₃) reacts vigorously with alkenes to form unstable molozonide. It rearranges spontaneously to form an ozonide. Reduction of Ozonide: Ozonides are unstable compounds and are reduced directly on treatment with zinc and boiling H₂O. The reduction produces carbonyl compounds (aldehydes or ketones). Ozonolysis is used to locate the position of double bond in an alkene. The C-atom of double bond is changed to carbonyl group. Example: Ozonide (from ethene) + 2H₂O (100°C) → 2 HCHO (Formaldehyde) + H₂O₂. 8. Polymerization: Polymerization is a process in which small organic molecules which are called monomers combine together to form a larger molecule. The substances so produced are called polymers. Example: nCH₂=CH₂ (400°C, 100 atm, traces O₂) → -(CH₂-CH₂)-ₙ (Polythene, Polyethylene). A good quality polythene is obtained when ethane is polymerized in the presence of aluminium triethyl Al(C₂H₅)₃ and titanium tetrachloride (TiCl₄). Interesting Information: Examples of natural and synthetic polymers: Natural: Protein (Amino acids), Starch (Glucose), Cellulose (Glucose), DNA (Nucleotides). Synthetic: Poly(ethene) (Ethene), Poly(chloroethene) (PVC) (Chloroethene), Poly(phenylethene) (polystyrene) (Phenylethene), polyester (Ethane-1,2-diol and benzene-1,2-dicarboxylic acid). Important Definitions: Localized Bonds: A covalent bond in which the electron density is concentrated between only two nuclei of the combining atoms is called localized bond and the bonding electrons are called localized electrons. This type of bonds are fully described by single lewis structure. e.g. CH₂=CH₂. Delocalized bonds: The organic compounds in which one or more p-orbitals are spread out over more than two nuclei (i.e. atoms), are called delocalized bonds. Steric Effect: The presence of bulky groups in close proximity of each other causes Van der Waal’s repulsions and this phenomenon is called steric effect. Inductive Effect: The effect in which a polar bond induces polarity in an adjacent bond and even further along the chain is called inductive effect. Hyperconjugation: Hyperconjugation is the interaction of the electrons in a sigma bond (usually C-H or C-C) with an adjacent empty or partially filled p-orbital, is called hyperconjugation or no bond resonance. It increases the stability of the compound. Conjugation or conjugated system: A system (molecule) in which there are three or more than three p-orbitals on adjacent atoms and can form an alternate double and single bonds is called a conjugated system. Due to conjugation the system is stabilized. Quick Quiz 4. 1. What is conjugation? 2. What is dehydration? 3. What is dehydrohalogenation? 4. What is hydrogenation? 5. What is ozonolysis? 6. What is Markownikov’s rule? 7. What is electrophilic reagent? 8. When 2-Methyl propene reacts with HCl: What are the structures of the two possible intermediate carbocations? (1) Which of the two ions is the more stable? (2) What will be the major product of the reaction between 2-Methyl propene and HCl? 16.7 ALKYNES. 16.7.1 Nomenclature: IUPAC System: 1) Select a longest continuous chain of carbon atoms containing triple bond. 2) ‘ane’ of the alkane is replaced by -yne. 3) The main chain is numbered starting from the terminal carbon nearer to the triple bond. 4) Triple bond is given the number of the lower carbon atom attached to triple bond separated by hyphen. 5) Name the substituents before the name of parent hydrocarbon and indicate its position by number. Example: 3-n-Propyl-1-Pentyne. 6) If two or more triple bonds are there in the molecule, use the prefixes di-, tri-, etc. Example: 1,3-Pentadiyne. Naming of Molecules Containing Both the Double and Triple Bonds: 1) The suffix –‘ene’ always precedes –‘yne’ in the name of compound, even when the double bond is assigned the large number. 2) The position number for the double bond is placed before the name of parent hydrocarbon. 3) The position number of triple bond is placed between –‘ene’ and –‘yne’. 4) If double and triple bonds occur at the same distance from each terminal, the double bond is given the lower possible number. Quick Quiz. Give the IUPAC name of the following: (a) CH₃CH₂C≡CH (1-Butyne). (b) HC≡C-C≡CH (1,3-Butadiyne). (c) CH₂=CH-C≡CH (1-Buten-3-yne). (d) HC≡C-C≡C-CH=CH-CH₃ (1,3-Heptadiyne-6-ene). (e) CH₃-CH₂-C≡C-CH₂-CH₃ (3-Hexyne). 16.7.2. Relative Stability. Alkynes are more stable as compared to alkenes due to the presence of extra pi-bond. That is why alkynes are less reactive than alkenes. This can be supported if we compare thermodynamic data of alkynes and alkenes, i.e. ΔH of 1-Hexyne = 290 kJ/mol while ΔH of 1-Hexene = 126 kJ/mol. 16.7.3. Structure. The two carbons of a triple bond in acetylene (alkyne) are sp-hybridized. They are linked by a sigma-bond due to sp-sp orbitals overlap. The unhybridized two p-orbitals on one carbon side way overlap with two p-orbitals on other carbon to form two pi-bonds. The cloud of pi-electrons is present cylindrically symmetrical about the carbon-carbon sigma-bond. It is a linear molecule hence geometrical isomer is not observed in it. 16.7.4. Physical Properties. 1. In general, alkynes are non-polar and are insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar organic solvents. 2. They are colourless, odourless except acetylene which has a garlic like odour. 3. The melting points, boiling points and densities increase gradually with the increase in molecular masses. 4. The first three members carbon alkynes (C₂-C₄) are gases. The next eight members (C₅-C₁₂) are liquids and higher members are solids at room temperature. 16.7.5 Preparation of Alkynes by Elimination Reactions. Alkynes can be prepared by the following methods: (i) Dehydrohalogenation of dihalides: Alkynes can be prepared by dehydrohalogenation of vicinal and geminal dihalides in the presence of some alkaline reagents. (a) A vicinal dihalides: A dihalide which contains two halogen atoms on adjacent carbon atoms is known as vicinal dihalide. Elimination of two molecules of hydrogen halides from two adjacent carbons with the help of alcoholic KOH or NaNH₂ in liquid ammonia gives an alkyne. Example: 1,2-dibromoethane + 2KOH (alcohol) → Ethyne + 2KBr + 2H₂O. In the presence of strong base such as KOH and at high temperature triple bond at terminal C-atom of higher alkynes migrates to give more disubstituted alkyne. Therefore, alcoholic KOH is useful when rearrangement is not possible, 1-alkynes can be prepared from vic-dihalides with sodium amide in liquid ammonia. Example: 2,3-dibromobutane + 2KOH (alcohol, 100-200°C) → 2-Butyne + 2KBr + 2H₂O. 1,2-dibromopropane + 2NaNH₂ (liq. NH₃, -33°C) → Propyne + 2NaBr + 2NH₃. (b) Geminal Dihalide: A dihalide containing two halogen atoms linked with the same carbon atom is known as geminal dihalide. When geminal dihalide is treated with strong base, alkyne is formed, e.g., 1,1-dibromopropane + 2NaNH₂ (NH₃) → Propyne + 2NaBr + 2NH₃. 16.7.6. Reactivity. Acetylene (alkyne) is an unsaturated hydrocarbon and shows addition reactions. It also undergoes substitution reactions due to easy cleavage of C-H bond. The pi-electrons are present cylindrically symmetrical about carbon-carbon sigma bond and the removal of terminal hydrogen is possible without disturbing carbon -carbon bonding. Therefore, electrophilic substitution reactions are possible in 1-alkynes. 16.7.6. Acidity of Terminal Alkynes. In ethyne and other terminal alkynes like propyne, the hydrogen atom is bonded to the carbon atoms with sp-s overlap. As sp hybrid orbital has 50% s-character in it and renders the carbon atoms more electronegative. As a result, the sp hybridized carbon atom of a terminal alkyne pulls the electrons more strongly making the attached hydrogen atom slightly acidic, and can be removed when treated with a mild base. H-C≡C-R + B⁻ → R-C≡C:⁻ + BH. Examples: (1) When 1-alkyne or ethyne is treated with sodamide in liquid ammonia or passed over molten sodium, alkynides or acetylides are obtained. R-C≡CH + 2NaNH₂ (liq NH₃) → R-C≡CNa + NH₃. HC≡CH + 2Na → NaC≡CNa + H₂ (Disodium acetylide). Sodium acetylide is a very valuable reagent for chemical synthesis and is essentially ionic in nature. (ii) When an acetylene or 1-alkyne is treated with an alkaline solution of silver nitrate a white precipitate of silver acetylide is formed. HC≡CH + 2AgNO₃ + 2NH₄OH → AgC≡CAg + 2NH₄NO₃ + 2H₂O (Disilver acetylide or silver ethynide, white ppt.). (iii) When acetylene or 1-alkyne is treated with an alkaline solution of cuprous chloride a reddish brown precipitate of copper acetylide is formed. HC≡CH + Cu₂Cl₂ + 2NH₄OH → CuC≡CCu + 2NH₄Cl + 2H₂O (Dicopper acetylide or copper ethynide, Reddish brown). Silver and copper acetylides reacts with minerals acids to regenerate alkynes. AgC≡CAg + dil. H₂SO₄ → HC≡CH + Ag₂SO₄. AgC≡CAg + dil. HNO₃ → HC≡CH + 2AgNO₃. CuC≡CCu + dil. H₂SO₄ → HC≡CH + Cu₂SO₄. These alkynides are used for the preparation, purification separation, and identification of alkynes. 16.7.7 Addition Reactions of Alkynes. 1. Hydrogenation: Alkynes react with hydrogen gas in the presence of suitable catalysts like finely divided Ni, Pt or Pd. In the first step alkenes are formed which then take up another molecule of hydrogen to form an alkane. HC≡CH + 2H₂ (Pt) → H₂C=CH₂ (Ethene). H₂C=CH₂ + H₂ (Ni, heat) → H₃C-CH₃ (Ethane). Alkynes can be reduced to trans-alkenes by using Na in NH₃ (liq.). These reaction conditions do not reduce alkenes. Example: 2-Butyne + Na/NH₃(l) → Trans-2-Butene. 3. Hydrohalogenation: Alkynes react with hydrogen halides to form dihaloalkanes in two steps. Second addition is according to Markownikov’s Rule. HC≡CH + HBr → HC=CHBr (Vinyl bromide). HC=CHBr + HBr → H₂C-CHBr₂ (1,1-dibromoethane). 4. Hydration: When Water is added to alkynes in the presence of mercuric sulphate and sulphuric acid at 75°C, carbonyl compounds are formed. Except acetylene all other alkynes give ketones. Vinyl alcohol is an unstable and isomerizes to acetaldehyde. HC≡CH + H₂O (HgSO₄, H₂SO₄/75°C) → H₂C=CHOH (Vinyl alcohol) → CH₃CHO (Acetaldehyde). Propyne + H₂O (HgSO₄, H₂SO₄) → Acetone (Ketone). This reaction is industrially important because aldehydes can be prepared by this method. 5. Bromination: When alkynes are treated with Chlorine or bromine vicinal dihalides are formed. The Halogenation may be stopped at the dihaloalkene stage because the double bond of dihaloalkene is less nucleophilic than even triple bond itself. Example: Propyne + Br₂ (CCl₄, -34°C) → 1,2-Dibromopropene. 1,2-Dibromopropene + Br₂ → 1,1,2,2-Tetrabromopropane. 6. Ozonolysis: When ozone reacts with alkyne followed by the reaction with boiling water in the presence of zinc gives two compounds of carboxylic acid. R-C≡C-R + O₃ → Ozonide. Ozonide + 2H₂O (Zn) → 2 RCOOH (Carboxylic acid). 16.8 BENZENE AND SUBSTITUTED BENZENES. Discovered by = Michael Faraday. Isolated by = Hoffmann. Molecular formula = C₆H₆. Molecular weight = 78. Special Feature = (i) Resonance; (ii) Electrophilic substitution reactions. Michael Faraday discovered benzene in 1825, during the destructive distillation of vegetable oil. Hoffmann isolated it from coal tar. Benzene and substituted benzenes are called arenes. 16.8.1 Nomenclature. I. Mono Substituted Benzenes: Common system: The following procedures are adopted for naming mono substituted benzenes: (1) Parent name is benzene and the substituent is indicated by a prefix, e.g., methyl, Ethyl, chloro, Nitro etc. (2) The substituent and the benzene ring taken together may form a new parent name. The largest parent name is preferred e.g., C₆H₅CH₃ may be named as: (i) Methyl benzene (ii) Phenyl methane. According to “the largest rule” methyl benzene is preferred. The common name of some benzene compounds are: Toluene (CH₃), Phenol (OH), Aniline (NH₂), Anisole (OCH₃), Styrene (CH=CH₂), Benzoic acid (COOH), Cumene (Isopropylbenzene), Benzaldehyde (CHO). IUPAC System of Naming: Mono substituted derivatives of benzene are named by prefixing the name of substituted to the word ‘benzene’. e.g., Chlorobenzene, Nitrobenzene, Bromobenzene. Many aromatic compounds have been known by their common or trivial names, which are still in use. IUPAC system retains these names. II. Disubstituted Benzene: 1) When there are two substituents on benzene ring, their relative positions are indicated by prefixes ortho(o), meta(m) and para(p) in common system of naming and by numerals while naming according to IUPAC system. 2) If the substituents are different and one of them is an alkyl group, the numbering is started from the ring carbon which is linked to the alkyl group and the second substituent gets the lowest possible number. 3) When a common name is used, the substituent which is responsible for name, e.g., CH₃ in toluene, and –OH in phenol, is considered to be on carbon number one, i.e., numbering is started from the carbon of ring bearing that group such a disubstituted compound. 4) When two substituents are different, they are usually put in alphabetical order. Examples: o-chlorotoluene (2-chlorotoluene), m-chlorophenol (3-chlorophenol), p-bromonitrobenzene (4-bromonitrobenzene). 5) Poly substituted benzenes are named by numbering the substituent to ring so as to give the substituents lowest possible numbers. The last-named substituent is assumed to be at position number 1. This number is not indicated in the name. Examples: 2,4-Dichloroaniline; 2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene; 2,6-Dibromophenol. 6) If the substituents are all alike their positions are indicated by numbering the substituents in a manner so as to give the lowest number to the substituents. Examples: 1,2,3-Tribromobenzene; 1,2,4,5-Tetramethylbenzene. 7) Some poly substituted benzenes are still known by their common name. Examples: Mesitylene, Durene, Resorcinol. Quick Quiz. Give the suitable name to each of the following: (a) 1,2-Dichlorobenzene; (b) 1,3-Dichlorobenzene; (c) 1,4-Dichlorobenzene; (d) 1-Bromo-2-methylbenzene; (e) 1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene; (f) 1,2,3-Trinitrobenzene. 16.8.2. Physical Properties. In the absence of polar substituents, arenes are typical of hydrocarbons having low melting point, boiling point and low solubility in polar solvents. 16.9 STRUCTURE OF BENZENE. 16.9.1 Old Concept. All 12 atoms in benzene, C₆H₆, lie in the same plane. Benzene has a planar, cyclic and conjugated structure. If one draws benzene as alternating C=C and C-C then the two different Kekule structures are obtained. These are two equally valid resonance contributors. Alternatively, these two forms can be combined in the resonance hybrid and the conjugated system represented by a circle as in the Robinson structure. Note that all of the C-C bonds are 1.4 Å (between typical C=C and C-C distances). In benzene all the C-C bonds are known to be of equal length (above) so there are no C=C and C-C. This is best represented by the resonance hybrid in the Robinson form. The Kekule structures gives a more precise description of the electron positions that can avoid confusion. Therefore, it is a good idea to use a Kekule representation. Draw backs of Kekule structure: Kekule’s structure failed to explain as to why 1. Benzene is less reactive; 2. It shows dual character, i.e., it shows addition as well as substitution reaction; 3. It has less heat of formation; 4. It has equal C-C bonds. Spectroscopic studies and X-rays analysis have shown that benzene is a regular, flat planar hexagon. All six hydrogen atoms are co-planar with six carbon atoms. The bond angles are: (i) C-C-C = 120°, and (ii) C-C-H = 120°. 16.9.2 Modern concept. i. Molecular Orbital Treatment of Benzene: Each C-atom in benzene is sp²-hybridized because each C-atom is attached to three other atoms. Therefore, it forms three sp² hybridized orbitals. Two sp² hybridized orbitals overlap with two sp² hybridized orbitals of two other carbon atoms to form two sigma bonds. Similarly one sp² hybridized orbital of each carbon overlaps with 1s atomic orbital of hydrogen atom forming sigma bond. Combination of such six structures and overlap of six hydrogen atoms (1s¹) produces the sigma framework of benzene. Six atomic p-orbitals one on each c-atom, are present perpendicular to this sigma bonding. Each p-orbital is in a position to overlap in parallel manners with neighbouring p-orbitals to give a continuous sheath of negative charges. It results in extensive delocalized pi-bonding which spreads over all the carbon nuclei of benzene. Delocalization of p-orbitals over the entire ring produces sandwich like structure of benzene and decreases the energy of molecule. Consequently, the molecule becomes more stable and less reactive. According to molecular orbital picture, each carbon-carbon bond in benzene consists of one full sigma-bond and half a pi-bond. Because of this reason, the carbon-carbon bond length is equal and benzene shows substitution as well as addition reactions. ii. Resonance: "The possibility of different pairing schemes of valence electrons of an atom within the molecule is called resonance" and the different structures thus arranged are called "Resonance Structures" or Canonical Structures. The processes in which one can take a weighted average of all the possible structures which can be written for a compound is called resonance. Explanation: The resonance is represented by a double-headed arrow e.g. the following different pairing schemes of the fourth valence (the p-electrons) of carbon atoms are possible in benzene. This gives the following resonating structures of benzene: (a), (b) were proposed by Kekule and c, d, e were proposed by Dewar. The stability of a molecule increases with increase in the number of its resonance structures. Thus molecule of benzene is chemically quite stable. In fact the structure of benzene is a resonance hybrid of all five structures, (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) in which the Kekule’s structure (a) and (b) are major contributors while Dewar’s structures (c), (d) and (e) are minor contributors. Therefore, benzene molecule can be represented by either of the two Kekule’s structure. Since the structure of benzene is a resonance hybrid, therefore all the C-C bond lengths are equal (1.39Å) but different from those in alkanes (1.54Å), alkenes (1.34Å) and alkynes (1.20Å). It is intermediate between those in alkanes and alkenes. 16.9.3 Resonance Energy. The resonance energy is defined as the energy difference between the calculated and experimentally determined heat of hydrogenation of conjugated system is called resonance energy. The resonance energy of a compound is a measure of the extra stability of the conjugated system compared to the corresponding number of isolated double bonds. This can be calculated from experimental measurements. The diagram shows the experimental heats of hydrogenation, ΔH_h, for three molecules, benzene, 1,3-cyclohexadiene and cyclohexene. These are reduced to the same product, cyclohexane. The ΔH_h for "cyclohexatriene", a hypothetical molecule in which the double bonds are assumed to be isolated from each other, is calculated to be 3 times the value for cyclohexene. This value reflects the energy we could expect to be released from 3 isolated C=C. By comparing this value with the experimental value for benzene, we can conclude that benzene is 152 kJ or 36 kcal / mol more stable than the hypothetical system. This is the resonance energy for benzene. 16.9.4 Reactivity and Reactions. Due to delocalized p-orbitals of benzene, arenes are typically nucleophiles (like alkenes and alkynes). Unlike alkenes and alkynes (which undergo addition reactions), arenes typically undergo substitution reactions in which a group (usually -H) is replaced and the aromatic system is retained. The stability of the aromatic system favours substitution over addition which would destroy the aromatic system. The delocalization of six pi-electrons makes it extra stable. So for addition reaction benzene requires more vigorous condition than that of alkenes and alkynes. (a) Catalytic Hydrogenation: Benzene can be hydrogenated in the presence of a catalyst as Pt, Pd, or Raney Ni only at higher temperature and pressures. Example: Benzene + 3H₂ (Pt, Pd, Raney Ni/200°C) → Cyclohexane. (b) Addition of Halogens: Benzene can add three molecules of chlorine or bromine under the influence of light. The benzene ring becomes saturated, and we get hexachlorocyclohexane and hexabromocyclohexane. This reaction shows that benzene has three double bonds in the ring. Example: Benzene + 3Cl₂ (uv. light) → 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane. Benzene + 3Br₂ (uv. light) → 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexabromocyclohexane. Reaction of F₂ and I₂: The reaction of F₂ with benzene is very vigorous, while with I₂ it is very slow. Conclusion: The addition reactions of hydrogen and chlorine with benzene show that benzene is unsaturated hydrocarbon and has three double bonds in it. (c) Oxidation Reactions: Benzene is stable towards general oxidizing agents. However, it can be oxidized under certain conditions: (i) Catalytic Oxidation: When benzene is oxidized with air in the presence of V₂O₅ at 450°C, then we get maleic anhydride. 2C₆H₆ + 9O₂ (V₂O₅, 450°C) → 2C₄H₂O₃ (Maleic anhydride) + 4CO₂ + 4H₂O. This is commercial method for the preparation of maleic anhydride. Benzene is not oxidized by KMnO₄ or K₂Cr₂O₇. (ii) Combustion: When benzene is burnt in the presence of air or oxygen, CO₂ and H₂O are produced, just like other aliphatic hydrocarbons. 2C₆H₆ + 15O₂ → 12CO₂ + 6H₂O. (iii) Ozonolysis: Benzene reacts with ozone and gives glyoxal, passing through triozonide as an intermediate. C₆H₆ + 3O₃ → Triozonide (C₆H₆O₆) (H₂O, Zn) → 3 O=CH-CH=O (Glyoxal) + ZnO. (iv) Side chain Oxidation: When alkaline or acidic solution of KMnO₄ or K₂Cr₂O₇ is added to alkyl benzene, alkyl groups present in the benzene ring are oxidized into carboxylic groups. Example: Toluene + 3[O] (Alkaline KMnO₄) → Benzoic acid + H₂O. Ethyl benzene + 6[O] (Alkaline KMnO₄) → Benzoic acid + CO₂ + H₂O. Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution Reactions. Introduction: The pi-electrons of benzene are highly stabilized due to resonance. They are not readily available for the electrophilic attack like the electrons of alkenes. A weak electrophile cannot attack on benzene ring. Hence more powerful electrophiles are required for a successful attack to penetrate and break the continuous sheath of electron cloud in benzene. Substitution is preferred over addition in order to preserve the stable aromatic character. General reaction: Benzene on reaction with an electrophile in the presence of Lewis acid catalyst gives substituted benzene. C₆H₆ + E⁺ (FeX₃) → C₆H₅E + H⁺. Mechanism: It consists of the following three steps. 1. Formation of a strong electrophile (E⁺). E⁺ is a strong electrophile. 2. Formation of phenonium ion: The electrophile E⁺ thus produced attacks on benzene ring to form phenonium ion. C₆H₆ + E⁺ → C₆H₆E⁺ (Phenonium ion). 3. Regeneration of catalyst: The phenonium ion is unstable therefore H⁺ ion is removed to give substitution product. C₆H₆E⁺ + [FeX₄]⁻ → C₆H₅E + FeX₃ + HX. Nitration: The substitution of NO₂ group to a benzene ring in the presence of conc. H₂SO₄ at 50-55 °C to form nitrobenzene is called Nitration reaction. C₆H₆ + HNO₃ (H₂SO₄, heat) → C₆H₅NO₂ + H₂O. Mechanism: Sulphuric acid reacts with nitric acid to generate nitronium ion. HONO₂ + H₂SO₄ (50°C) ⇌ NO₂⁺ + HSO₄⁻ + H₂O. C₆H₆ + NO₂⁺ → C₆H₆NO₂⁺ (Phenonium ion). C₆H₆NO₂⁺ + HSO₄⁻ → C₆H₅NO₂ + H₂SO₄. Sulphonation: The substitution of sulphonic acid group to a benzene ring is called Sulphonation. When benzene is heated with fuming H₂SO₄ or concentrated H₂SO₄, it yields benzene sulphonic acid. Fuming H₂SO₄ has free sulphur trioxide which is electron deficient (electrophile) and causes substitution. C₆H₆ + HSO₃ (80°C) → C₆H₅SO₃H (Benzenesulphonic acid). C₆H₆ + SO₃ (H₂SO₄, 25°C) → C₆H₅SO₃H (Benzenesulphonic acid). Mechanism: When sulphuric acid alone is used, the actual electrophile in this reaction is SO₃. H₂SO₄ + H₂SO₄ ⇌ H₃O⁺ + SO₃ + HSO₄⁻. Benzene + SO₃ → Benzenesulphonic acid. Halogenation: The substitution of halogen to a benzene ring in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst to form halobenzene is called halogenation reaction. Halogenation of benzene occurs with halogens (X₂) in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst FeX₃. Chlorination and bromination are normal reaction but fluorination is too vigorous to control. Iodination gives poor yield. C₆H₆ + X₂ (FeX₃) → C₆H₅X + HX (X = Br, Cl). Example: C₆H₆ + Br₂ (Fe or FeBr₃) → C₆H₅Br + HBr (Bromobenzene). C₆H₆ + Cl₂ (FeCl₃) → C₆H₅Cl + HCl (Chlorobenzene). Mechanism: X₂ + FeX₃ ⇌ X⁺ + FeX₄⁻. Cl₂ + FeCl₃ ⇌ Cl⁺ + FeCl₄⁻. C₆H₆ + Cl⁺ → C₆H₆Cl⁺ (Phenonium ion). C₆H₆Cl⁺ + FeCl₄⁻ → C₆H₅Cl + HCl + FeCl₃. Halogenation of alkyl side chain: When alkylated benzene is treated with chlorine or bromine in the presence of sunlight, only the alkyl groups are substituted. Example: Toluene + Cl₂ (sunlight) → Benzyl chloride + HCl. Benzyl chloride + Cl₂ (sunlight) → Benzal chloride + HCl. Benzal chloride + Cl₂ (sunlight) → Benzotrichloride + HCl. Friedel-Crafts Alkylation: The substitution of an alkyl group in the benzene ring in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst AlCl₃ to form an alkylated benzene is called Friedel Crafts alkylation reactions. General reaction: C₆H₆ + R-X (AlCl₃) → C₆H₅R + HX (Alkyl halide to Alkylbenzene). Examples: C₆H₆ + CH₃Cl (AlCl₃) → C₆H₅CH₃ (Toluene) + HCl. C₆H₆ + CH₃CH₂Cl (AlCl₃) → C₆H₅CH₂CH₃ (Ethylbenzene) + HCl. Mechanism: (i) R-Cl + AlCl₃ → R⁺ + AlCl₄⁻. (ii) C₆H₆ + R⁺ → C₆H₆R⁺ (Phenonium ion). (iii) C₆H₆R⁺ + Cl-AlCl₃ → C₆H₅R + HCl + AlCl₃ (Alkyl benzene). Friedel-Crafts Acylation: The substitution of an acyl group (RCO-) to a benzene ring in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst such as AlCl₃ to form an acetylated benzene is called Friedel Crafts Acylation. General reaction: C₆H₆ + R-COCl (AlCl₃) → C₆H₅COR + HCl (Acid Chloride to Acylbenzene). Example: C₆H₆ + CH₃COCl (AlCl₃) → C₆H₅COCH₃ (Acetophenone, Methyl Phenyl ketone) + HCl. Mechanism: (i) RCOCl + AlCl₃ → RCO⁺ + AlCl₄⁻. (ii) C₆H₆ + RCO⁺ → C₆H₆COR⁺ (Phenonium ion). (iii) C₆H₆COR⁺ + AlCl₄⁻ → C₆H₅COR + HCl + AlCl₃. The Effect of Substituents (orienting effect). When an electrophilic substitution reaction takes place on benzene ring, we get only one monosubstituted benzene because all the six positions in the ring are equivalent. However, the position of a second group into the ring depends on the nature of the first group. The second substituted may enter at ortho, para or meta position. On statistical basis the proportion of disubstituted products would be 40% ortho, 40% meta and 20% para disubstituted products. Example: Chlorination of nitrobenzene in the presence of Lewis acid catalyst forms 3-nitro chlorobenzene as the main product. Nitrobenzene + Cl₂ (FeCl₃) → m-chloronitrobenzene + HCl. However, nitration of chlorobenzene gives a mixture of o-nitrochloro-benzene and p-nitrochloro-benzene is obtained. Chlorobenzene + 2(HNO₃ + H₂SO₄) → o-nitrochlorobenzene + p-nitrochlorobenzene + 2H₂O. Classification of substituent on benzene ring. There are two types of groups: a. Ortho- and para- directing groups; b. Meta- directing groups. 1. Ortho and para directing groups: These groups release electrons towards the benzene ring, at ortho and para positions. Because these positions are electron rich, therefore the second group is substituted at ortho and para positions. They also enhance the reactivity of benzene ring. Example: The electron releasing effect of methyl groups is significant and it makes the ring a good nucleophile. Due to this increased reactivity, more nitro groups can enter the ring at ortho and para positions. Toluene + HNO₃ + H₂SO₄ (30-40°C) → o-nitrotoluene + p-nitrotoluene + 2H₂O. Further nitration gives 2,4-dinitrotoluene and 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT). Examples of ortho and para directing groups are: -N(CH₃)₂, -NH₂, -OH, -OCH₃, -Cl, -Br, -I and R- (alkyl groups). Although -F, -Cl, -Br and -I are ortho-para directing groups but they deactivate the ring for further substitution. 2. Meta-Directing Groups: These groups withdraw the electrons of the benzene ring from ortho and para positions. Therefore the ortho and para positions are more electrons deficient than the meta position. Thus, the incoming electrophile will prefer to attack on meta position rather than ortho and para positions. These groups are called meta-directing groups. These groups decrease the chemical reactivity of benzene. Example: Nitrobenzene + HNO₃ + H₂SO₄ (95°C) → m-dinitrobenzene + H₂O. The substitution of third nitro groups is not possible because nitro group has deactivated the ring. Other examples of meta directing groups are: -NO₂, -COOH, -CHO, –SO₃H, -CN, -COR etc. Determining the directive, activating and deactivating effects of the substituents: 1. All alkyl groups, phenyl group and groups having one or more non bonding electron pairs on the atom adjacent to the ring are ortho-para directing. -R, -OH, -OR, -NH₂, -X. 2. substituent having a positive (or partial positive) charge on the atom adjacent to the ring are meta directing groups. Example: -NO₂, -CN, -COOH, -CHO, -COR, -SO₃H. 3. All ortho-para directing groups activate the ring except halogens which are partially deactivators. 4. All meta directing groups are deactivators. Quick Quiz 5. 1. (a) Describe the structure of benzene on the basis of following: (1) atomic orbital treatment (ii) resonance method. 2. Predict the major products of bromination of the following compounds: (a) Toluene (b) Nitrobenzene (c) Bromobenzene (d) Benzoic acid (e) Benzaldehyde (f) Phenol. Society, Technology and Science: HYDROCARBONS IMPORTANT AS FUEL FOR FUTURE ENERGY NEEDS OF PAKISTAN. Ethanol, Natural Gas, Propane, Biodiesel - an alternative fuel based on vegetable oils or animal fats, Methanol - also known as wood alcohol, P-Series fuels - a blend of ethanol, natural gas liquids and methyltetrahydrofuran (Me THF). P-Series fuels can be used alone or mixed with gasoline in any ratio by simply adding it to the tank. Uses of Hydrocarbons: 1. Butane is used as a fuel in lighter. 2. Butane is also used in same camping stoves. 3. Coal is used for the manufacturing of synthetic petrol. 4. Ethylene is the hormone that causes tomatoes and apples to ripen. 5. Oxyacetylene torch is used for cutting of metals. 6. Methane is used to manufacture urea fertilizer. Key Points: Compared to other functional groups, alkanes tend to have low melting and boiling points and very low solubility in polar solvents such as water. Alkanes are the simplest organic compounds, comprised of only sp³ hybridized C and H atoms connected by sigma bonds. They have a general formula of CₙH₂ₙ₊₂. Branched alkanes are more stable than linear alkanes, e.g. 2-methylpropane is more stable than n-butane. Alkanes react with halogens by a radical mechanism to give haloalkanes. The mechanism consists of three steps, initiation, propagation and termination. Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one C=C. the double bond is composed of a σ and a π bond. Carbon atoms in alkenes are sp² hybridized. Alkenes are very reactive compounds. They undergo electrophilic reactions very easily. Addition of unsymmetrical reagent to an unsymmetrical alkene takes place in accordance with the Markownikov’s Rule. Compounds that have the same molecular formula but different chemical structures are called isomers. Constitutional (or structural) isomers differ in the order in which the atoms are connected so they contain different functional groups and / or bonding patterns. Example: 1-propanol, 2-propanol and ethyl methyl ether (C₃H₈O). Stereoisomers contain the same functional groups and differ only in the arrangement of atoms in space.