organcompound_2ndchem_fed.txt

After completing this lesson, we will be able to: define organic chemistry and organic compounds. explain why there is such a diversity and magnitude of organic compounds. classify organic compounds on structural basis. explain the use of coal as a source of both aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons. explain the use of plants as a source of organic compounds. explain that organic compounds are also synthesized in the lab. define functional groups and homologous series. INTRODUCTION. There are two main classes of chemical compounds, inorganic and organic. They are classified on the basis of source from which they were derived. The compounds which were of mineral origin were known as inorganic such as table salt, marble, carbon dioxide etc. and those of vegetable or animal origin were called organic for example; acetic acid (from vinegar), alcohol (from wine), tartaric acid (from grapes) etc. Organic chemistry is concerned with the chemistry of living material or substances which were at one time alive. It is therefore concerned with living plants or animals or substances like coal and oil which are derived from living plants (coal), or from microscopic sea organisms (oil). Organic chemistry is now defined as the chemistry of compounds of carbon as carbon is the essential element in all organic compounds. However there are several compounds like carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO₂), carbon disulphide (CS₂), carbonates (CO₃²⁻), bicarbonates (HCO₃⁻), Cyanides (CN⁻), thiocyanates (SCN⁻) etc are studied in inorganic chemistry because of their properties. Modern definition of organic chemistry: Organic chemistry is that branch of chemistry which deals with the study of compounds of carbon and hydrogen (Hydrocarbons) and their derivatives. 15.1 SOURCES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS. 15.1.1 Fossil Remains. The main sources of organic compounds are coal, petroleum and natural gas. These are called fossil fuels. I - Coal. Coal is one of the major sources of organic compounds. It yields coke and coal-tar on pyrolysis or destructive distillation. More than 200 organic compounds have been directly isolated from coal-tar. These coal-tar products form the starting materials for the manufacture of thousands of useful aromatic compounds, including perfumes, drugs, dyes, photographic developers, and others. II - Petroleum. In some parts of the world, a black thick sticky liquid seeps out of the ground. This liquid is called petroleum or crude oil. Petroleum is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons whose composition varies according to its place of occurrence. III - Natural Gas: It is a mixture of low boiling hydrocarbons. Major portion of the natural gas is methane (CH₄ about 85%); other gases include ethane, propane and butane. It is formed by the decomposition of organic matter. In Pakistan there are vast reserves of gas at Sui in Baluchistan, Sind and Punjab. 15.1.2 Plants and Natural Product Chemistry. Many organic compounds are obtained directly from plant and animal sources by suitable methods of isolation. A few familiar examples are carbohydrates (cellulose, sugars, starches), proteins (silk, wool, casein, food proteins), fats and oils (cottonseed, soybeans oils, lard, butter), alkaloids (quinine, morphine, strychnine), hormones, vitamins, perfumes, flavors, resins. 15.1.3 Partial and Total Synthesis. 1. Partial Synthesis. In this synthesis an intermediate product of reaction is used to synthesize the required product. Bio-molecules are treated with other reagents to get the targeted drugs or medicines etc. Example: Preparation of vegetable ghee and formation of soap. 2. Total Synthesis: In this synthesis, the starting material is converted through many steps into targeted product. Example: Synthesis of urea by Wohler (1828). 2NH₃ + CO₂ → NH₂COONH₄ (Ammonium Carbamate). NH₂COONH₄ (heat) → NH₂CONH₂ (Urea). 15.1.4 Fermentation/Biotechnology. The chemical breakdown of an organic compound with the help of micro-organisms such as bacteria, yeast etc. is called fermentation. The field of applied biology that deals with the study of the use of living organisms and bio processes in medicines, technology and engineering is called biotechnology. Biotechnology is the use of living organisms to develop useful products. For example, the fermentation of molasses or sugar produces, alcohol, vinegar and many other products. Quick Quiz 1. 1. Define modern definition of organic chemistry. 2. List different sources of organic compounds. 3. Write important products from petroleum. 4. What are alkaloids? 5. Define fermentation? 15.2 Coal (as a source of organic compound). Coal is produced by the decaying of trees buried under the earth crust under the influence of temperature and high pressure. These trees got converted into coal. 15.2.1 Destructive Distillation of Coal. When coal is heated in the absence of air (temperature ranging from 500-1000°C); it is converted into coke, coal gas and coal tar. Coal tar contains a large number of organic compounds which separate out on fractional distillation. The total coal reserves of Pakistan are estimated by the geological survey of Pakistan to be 184 billion tons. Products: Coke, Coal gas, Ammonical liquor, Coal tar. From Coal tar, by fractional distillation: Benzene, Toluene, Naphthalene, Anthracene, Phenol. 15.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS. Organic compounds have entirely different properties from inorganic compounds. Some of their general properties are described below: 1. Composition. Carbon is an essential constituent of all organic compounds. 2. Combustion. Organic compounds with high percentage of carbon are generally combustible in nature. 3. Melting and Boiling Points. Organic compounds generally have low melting and boiling points and are volatile in nature. 4. Solubility. Organic compounds with non polar linkages are generally soluble in organic solvents such as alcohol, ether, benzene, etc. They are less soluble in water. 5. Stability. Since organic compounds have low melting and boiling points, they generally decompose at high temperature into simple substances. 6. Electrical Conductivity. Due to the presence of covalent bonds, organic compounds are poor conductor of electricity both in fused state and in solution form. 7. Source. Most of organic compounds are obtained from plants and animal sources. 8. Rate of Reaction. Their rates of reaction are very slow and need specific conditions. Quick Quiz 2. 1. What is coal? 2. What are the products of fractional distillation of coal tar? 3. What we obtain by fractional distillation of coal gas? 15.4 USES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS. The importance of organic compounds in modern everyday life is illustrated by the following list: 1. Food: (proteins, fats, carbohydrates, oils). 2. Clothing: (cotton, silk, wool, nylon, rayon, dacron). The natural fiber like cotton, silk and wool have plant and animal origin. Synthetic fiber like rayon, dacron and nylon are prepared in the industry. 3. Shelter: (wood, paints, varnishes). 4. Power and Transportation: (natural gas, petroleum products, coal). Natural gas, petroleum and gas used for power and transportation are organic substances. 5. Medicines and Drugs: (Penicillin, streptomycin). All types of the medicines used in the allopathy, homeopathy and desi-tib involve the organic compounds. 6. Insecticides: Insecticides like DDT, which are being widely used are organic substances. 7. Hormones and Steroids: Hormones and steroids are complex organic compounds. 8. Vitamins and Enzymes: All the vitamins which are dietary factors are organic compounds. Similarly enzymes are organic substances. 9. Antiseptics and Anesthetics: These are the families of the medicines and are organic in nature. 10. Pigments and Dyes: Pigments and dyes are used for paints and are organic in nature. 11. Paper and Inks: Paper and inks are the sources of civilization and organic materials. 12. Perfumes and Flavors: Perfumes flavors and all cosmetics are organic in nature. 13. Plastics, Rubbers, and Resins: Plastics, rubber and resins are organic in nature. 14. Propellants and Explosives: Propellants, explosives and refrigerants are well-known organic materials. 15. Soaps and Detergents: Soaps and detergent are organic compounds. 16. Herbicides: Teflon. 17. Photographic films and Developers. 15.5 NEW ALLOTROPES OF CARBONS: BUCKY BALLS. The full name of Bucky Balls is Buckminster Fullerenes. Scientists named it after an architect Buckminster, who designed a geodesic dome shaped building in Montreal. Bucky balls are used as semi-conductors and lubricants. In 1985, a new group of allotropic forms of carbon was discovered. These have carbon atoms ranging from forty to hundred. The carbon atoms are arranged in a hollow cage like structure. They are called Bucky Balls. The simplest of them is C₆₀ and its molecule is made up of sixty carbon atoms. The carbon atoms fold around and make a ball shaped molecule. The new molecule looks just like a football. The carbon atoms join together to form pentagon and hexagon structures. Quick Quiz 3. 1. What are allotropes? 2. Why it was given the name Bucky balls? 3. Define the third allotropic forms of Carbon? 15.6 FUNCTIONAL GROUPS AND HOMOLOGOUS SERIES. 15.6.1 Functional Group. The properties of an organic molecule are predominately determined by the properties of the functional group in that compound. A functional group is an atom or group of atoms in a molecule that gives characteristic properties to the molecule. Double and triple bonds are functional groups. Other examples include -Cl, -Br, -OH, -NH₂ groups. Once the properties of the functional groups are known then the properties of any molecule containing a functional group may be predicted. Each functional group undergoes characteristic reactions. The concept of functional group is important in organic chemistry for three reasons: 1) Functional groups serve as basis for nomenclature (naming) of organic compounds. 2) Functional groups serve to classify organic compounds into classes. All compounds with the same functional group belong to the same class. 3) A functional group is a site of chemical reactivity in a molecule. A molecule can contain more than one functional group. It is then said to be Polyfunctional, and the properties of each functional group may be modified by the presence of the others. Quick Quiz 4. 1. What is organic compound? 2. What is meant by a functional group? Table: 15.1: Some common functional groups are: Alkane: Structure - Containing only C — H and C - C single bond. Example: CH₃ — CH₃ (Ethane). Alkene: Structure —C=C—. Example: H₂C=CH₂ (Ethene). Alkyne: Structure —C≡C—. Example: H—C≡C—H (Ethyne/Acetylene). Halide: Structure —C—X (X = F, Cl, Br, I). Example: H₃C—Cl (Methyl chloride). Alcohol: Structure —C—OH. Example: H₃C—OH (Methanol). Ether: Structure —C—O—C—. Example: H₃C—O—CH₃ (Dimethyl ether). Amine: Structure —C—NH₂. Example: H₃C—NH₂ (Methyl amine). Nitrile: Structure —C≡N. Example: H₃C—C≡N (Methyl cyanide/ Acetonitrile). Thiol: Structure —C—SH. Example: H₃C—SH (Methane thiol). Carbonyl: Structure C=O. (Present in Aldehydes, ketones, acids and derivatives of acids). Aldehyde: Structure —C(=O)H. Example: H₃C—C(=O)H (Acetaldehyde). Ketone: Structure —C(=O)—. Example: H₃C—C(=O)—CH₃ (Acetone). Carboxylic Acid: Structure —C(=O)OH. Example: CH₃—C(=O)OH (Acetic acid). Ester: Structure —C(=O)O—. Example: CH₃—C(=O)O—CH₃ (Methyl acetate). Amide: Structure —C(=O)NH₂. Example: H₃C—C(=O)NH₂ (Acetamide). Carboxylic acid chloride: Structure —C(=O)Cl. Example: H₃C—C(=O)Cl (Acetyl chloride). Carboxylic acid anhydride: Structure —C(=O)O—C(=O)—. Example: CH₃—C(=O)O—C(=O)—CH₃ (Acetic anhydride). 15.6.2 Homologous Series. A homologous series is a series of organic compounds in which two successive members of the series differ by a CH₂ unit (or by 14 amu by molar mass). The individual members are called Homolog. For example, the homologous series of alcohols can be represented as: General Formula is ROH or CₙH₂ₙ₊₁OH. n=1, R=CH₃, Formula=CH₃OH. n=2, R=CH₃CH₂, Formula=CH₃CH₂OH. n=3, R=CH₃CH₂CH₂, Formula=CH₃CH₂CH₂OH. n=4, R=CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂, Formula=CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₂OH. The general characteristics of a homologous series are: 1. All compounds in the series contain the same elements and the functional group. 2. All compounds in the series can be represented by a general formula. For example; The general formula for Alkane is CₙH₂ₙ₊₂, for alkene CₙH₂ₙ, and for alkyne CₙH₂ₙ₋₂. 3. The molecular formula of each Homologue series differs by CH₂ unit to the next one. 4. All compounds in the series can be prepared by similar methods. 5. They have similar chemical properties. 6. There is a gradual change in physical properties as the length of carbon chain increases in the same homologous series. Quick Quiz 5. 1. What are general formulas for alkanes, alkenes and alkynes? 2. What is Homologous series? 3. Why do we arrange compounds in homologous series? 15.7 DETECTION OF ELEMENTS IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS. Carbon is an essential constituent of all organic compounds. Hydrogen is also present in almost all organic compounds but some of them may contain nitrogen sulphur, and halogen, Oxygen, Phosphorus and Metals. A) Detection of Carbon and Hydrogen: Carbon and hydrogen can be detected by heating small amount of organic compound with CuO in a glass test tube. On heating the mixture carbon and hydrogen are oxidized to CO₂ and H₂O respectively. CO₂ turns lime water milky which proves the presence of carbon and the water vapors turn white anhydrous copper sulphate blue shows the presence of hydrogen in the organic compound. C + 2CuO → CO₂ + 2Cu. CO₂ + Ca(OH)₂ → CaCO₃ + H₂O (Lime water, white ppt.). H₂ + CuO → Cu + H₂O. CuSO₄ (anhydrous, white) + 5H₂O → CuSO₄·5H₂O (Hydrated, blue). B) Detection of Nitrogen, Sulphur and Halogens. Preparation of Lassaigne’s Solution/Sodium Extract. 1) Cut a small piece of sodium metal with the help of knife. 2) Put this piece of sodium metal in a fusion tube. 3) Heat the fusion tube in a flame to melt sodium metal. 4) When sodium metal is melted, then add a small amount of powdered organic compound into fusion tube. 5) Then Heat the fusion tube again till its bottom become red hot. 6) Break this fusion tube in a China dish containing 20cm³ of distilled water. 7) Mixed, boil and then filter the solution. 8) The filtrate obtained is called Lassaigne’s solution or sodium extract. 9) Divide this filtrate into three portion and test, the presence of N, S and (X) halogens respectively. Reactions: Na + C + N → NaCN. 2Na + S → Na₂S. Na + N + C + S → NaSCN. Na + X → NaX (where X = Cl, Br, I). Nitrogen Test: To one portion of Lassaigne’s filtrate a few drops of NaOH is added to make it alkaline, then freshly prepared (FeSO₄) solution is added to it. The solution is boiled and a few drops of FeCl₃ solution and HCl are added to it. The appearance of blue or greenish blue (Prussian blue) color or ppt. proves the presence of nitrogen in the organic compound. Na + C + N → NaCN. 6NaCN + FeSO₄ → Na₄[Fe(CN)₆] + Na₂SO₄. 3Na₄[Fe(CN)₆] + 4FeCl₃ → Fe₄[Fe(CN)₆]₃ + 12NaCl (Prussian blue). Note: if a blood red color is produced instead of prussian blue color then it proves that nitrogen and sulphur both are present in the organic compound. 6NaSCN + FeSO₄ → Na₄[Fe(CNS)₆] + Na₂SO₄. 3Na₄[Fe(CNS)₆] + 4FeCl₃ → Fe₄[Fe(CNS)₆]₃ + 12NaCl (Blood red ppt.). Sulphur Test: The second portion of Lassaigne’s filtrate is acidified with acetic acid and boiled to expel H₂S gas which turns lead acetate paper black that indicates the presence of Sulphur in the compound. Na₂S + 2CH₃COOH → H₂S + 2CH₃COONa. H₂S + (CH₃COO)₂Pb → PbS + 2CH₃COOH (Black ppt.). Halogen Test: A third portion of Lassaigne’s solution is boiled with nitric acid to expel cyanide ions and sulphide ions, cool the solution and AgNO₃ solution is added. The formation of precipitate shows the presence of a halogens, white ppt soluble in NH₄OH shows the presence of chlorine, a pale yellow ppt. partially soluble in NH₄OH shows the presence of bromine and a deep yellow ppt. insoluble in NH₄OH indicated iodine. NaX + AgNO₃ → AgX + NaNO₃ (X = Cl⁻, Br⁻, I⁻). NaCl + AgNO₃ → AgCl + NaNO₃ (White ppt). NaBr + AgNO₃ → AgBr + NaNO₃ (Pale Yellow ppt). NaI + AgNO₃ → AgI + NaNO₃ (Deep Yellow ppt). Society, Technology and Science. ORGANIC COMPOUNDS OBTAINED FROM PLANTS AND ANIMALS. Most Sugars, Some alkaloids (a naturally occurring nitrogenous organic molecule), Some terpenoids (a large class of natural products consisting of isoprene (C₅H₈) units). Certain nutrients such as vitamins, Antigens, Carbohydrates, Enzymes, Hormones, Lipids and fatty acids, fats and oils, Neurotransmitters, Nucleic acids, Proteins, peptides and amino acids, Lectins (sugar-binding proteins). Quinine- an antimalarial and antipyretic medicine- is obtained from Cinchona ledgeriana (quinine tree). Nicotine- an insecticide- is obtained from Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco). Menthol- a rubefacient (a substance for topical application that causes dilation of the capillaries and an increase in blood circulation)- is obtained from Mentha species (mint). Camphor- a rubefacient- is obtained from Cinnamomum camphora (camphor tree). Rutin - used for the treatment of capillary fragility- is obtained from citrus species e.g. orange, grapefruit etc. Hesperidin- used for the treatment of capillary fragility- is obtained from citrus species e.g. orange. Curcumin- a choleretic- is obtained from Curcuma longa (turmeric). Cocaine- a local anaesthetic- is obtained from Erythroxylum coca (coca plant). Caffeine- a CNS stimulant- is obtained from Camellia sinensis (tea, coffee and cocoa). Bromelain- an anti-inflammatory drug- is obtained from Ananas comosus (pineapple). Key Points: Coal, petroleum and natural gas are important sources of organic compounds. The study of organic chemistry has been organized around functional groups. Each functional group defines an organic family. Organic chemistry is concerned with the chemistry of living material or substances which were at one time alive. It is therefore concerned with living plants or animals or substances like coal and oil which are derived from living plants (coal), or from microscopic sea organisms (oil). Coal is produced by the decaying of trees buried under the earth crust under the influence of temperature and pressure. These trees got converted into coal. The word petroleum is derived from the Latin words “Petra” meaning rock and “Oleum” meaning oil. It is also called mineral oil.