Acellular life

VIRUSES-DISCOVERY AND STRUCTURE
You have heard about influenza, bird flu, polio, swine flu, dengue fever etc. All these diseases are caused by the infectious agents called virus. They cause diseases in animals and plants. The word virus is derived from a Latin word “venom” meaning ‘poison’. In past, the term virus was associated with infectious diseases which have unknown cause. The first evidence of the existence of virus came when (in 1884) Charles Chamberland, who worked with Pasteur, found that the causative agents of rabies could pass through the porcelain filters (which allow only the particles of sizes of 100 ~ 1000 nm). However such filters could be used to completely remove all bacteria or other cells known at the time from a liquid suspension.

Tobacco mosaic disease was thought to be caused by bacteria. Iwanowsky (in 1892) extracted the juice from the leaves of tobacco having tobacco mosaic disease. In order to remove bacteria the juice was passed through porcelain filter. He then rubbed the filtered juice onto leaves of healthy plants, expecting no disease to develop, but the healthy leaves soon showed the symptoms of the disease.

By 1900, similar disease producing substance had been discovered in both plants and animals. The name filterable viruses were given to these substances. W. M. Stanley (in 1935) crystallized the infectious particle, now known as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Subsequently many other viruses actually have been seen with the help of the electron microscope. The study of virus is called virology.

Characteristics of Viruses
They show the characteristic of both living and nonliving things. The living characteristics of viruses are: (1) Viruses occur in different varieties or strains. (2) They have their own genetic material in the form of either DNA or RNA that can undergo mutation. (3) They reproduce using the metabolic machinery of the host cell they infect. (4) They enter the body of living organism and cause disease i.e., intracellular obligate parasite. (5) They get removed by ultraviolet rays.

The nonliving characteristics of viruses are: (1) They lack cellular structure, membrane and enzyme system and do not have metabolic activity of their own. (2) They can be stored in bottles. (3) They do not respire. Viruses behave as nonliving, inert particles outside the host.

General Structure of a Virus
Viruses have a very simple structure. A complete virus is called virion. Primarily, it can be divided into two parts i.e., core and coat. The inner part of virion which consists of genetic material (genome) and some proteins (enzymes). Genome is the genetic material, which is either DNA or RNA, single stranded or double stranded. Core proteins include one or two enzymes that help the virus in its mode of action within host body. For example, HIV has reverse transcriptase enzyme. Most viruses have protein coat surrounding the core which consists of repeating subunits called capsomers. The capsid is composed of capsomeres and determines the shape of virus. For example: Herpes virus that causes cold sores and hepatitis B virus contains DNA genome. Retrovirus contains RNA genome. Retrovirus has reverse transcriptase enzyme to convert single stranded RNA into double stranded DNA. Some viruses have an additional lipid-protein envelope around the capsid which they acquire while leaving the host cell. The viral envelope is often covered by viral glycoprotein spikes.

Classification of Viruses
One system of classification is based upon host organisms. Viruses are classified as bacterial virus, plant virus, animal virus. Bacterial virus: It attacks bacteria. It is a tadpole shaped virus like T4 bacteriophage. Plant viruses: Many viral plant diseases are known. Most plant viruses have RNA genome. Many are parasites that destroy certain cells in the plant body. For example, tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), having a rigid rod shaped capsid like TMV, potato yellow dwarf virus. Animal viruses: Viruses cause many diseases in animals. Viruses can cause warts, cold sores, influenza, etc. In the human body many viral infections cause serious diseases. For example, smallpox virus causes smallpox, measles virus causes measles, mumps virus causes mumps, poliovirus causes polio. On the bases of structure viruses are classified as: Polyhedral capsid e.g., Adenoviruses. Enveloped viruses e.g., Influenza viruses. Complex capsid e.g., Bacteriophage.

On the bases of genomes viruses are classified as: (a) Double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) e.g. smallpox virus. (b) Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) e.g., mild rash virus. (c) Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) e.g., diarrhea virus. (d) Single-stranded RNA (ssRNA); serves as mRNA e.g., Rubella virus. (e) ssRNA; template for mRNA synthesis e.g., Influenza virus. (f) ssRNA; template for DNA synthesis., HIV.

Host Range
Viruses are parasitic in nature. They are highly specific to their host. Bacteriophage infects only bacteria, the tobacco mosaic virus infects only tobacco plants and rabies virus infects only mammals. Some human viruses even specialize in a particular tissue. HIV will enter only certain types of white blood cells, the poliovirus reproduces in spinal nerve cells, and hepatitis viruses infect only liver cells. Human cold viruses infect only the cells lining the upper respiratory tract. Actually viruses have protein spikes on their surfaces which help them attach with specific receptors on the host cells. The specificity of attachment determines the host range of the virus. Some viruses have a narrow range, whereas others have quite a broad range. For example, poliovirus can enter the cells of only humans and other primates whereas rabies virus can enter all mammalian cells.

Viruses must require host cell to complete life cycle
A virus must have a host cell to parasitize in order to complete its life cycle because viruses are obligate intracellular parasites, which means they cannot multiply outside a living cell. They parasitize a wide variety of cells, from bacterial cells to human cells. An isolated virus is incapable of reproducing or do anything else except infect an appropriate host cell. Viruses lack metabolic enzymes, ribosomes, etc., for making proteins. Therefore they need host machinery to complete their life cycle.

Survival of viruses inside a host cell
However, host body has a strong defence against viruses but viruses escape the host defence by inhabiting the actions carried out by immune system (discussed in chapter 6) or by changing their own genetic constitution so rapidly that vaccines or drugs become ineffective. These are different ways that how a virus survives inside a host cell.

Survival of viruses outside the host
Since viruses do not need food to survive. They remain dormant outside the host like other non-living things. They are not threatened by the often harsh environment outside the host body. Being tiny, their only concern would be the pH and temperature of the medium. The virulence of the virus outside the host is maintained for a certain period of time. Viruses can survive for long periods (several hours to several days) whereas enveloped viruses survive for shorter time periods. Because enveloped viruses rely on the proteins on the surface of the membrane to attach to the host cell, this envelope is generally sensitive to degradation to sunlight and normal cleaning agents.

Bacteriophage
The bacteriophage or simply phage is the virus that attacks upon bacteria. Structure of Bacteriophage: It is generally a tadpole shaped virus. It consists of head, neck and tail. The head is icosahedral in shape. The inner core of head consists of a single stranded DNA genome. Below the head is narrow neck or collar which separates head and tail. The tail is a hollow tube made up of proteins through which the nucleic acid passes during infection. The tail is surrounded by a contractile sheath, which contracts during infection of the bacterium. At the end of the tail a Base Plate is present which possesses about six tail fibres around it and several tail pins or spikes at its surface. The tail fibres and tail pins are involved in the binding of phage to bacterium. At the bottom of core tube of tail, an enzyme, the lysozyme is present which is released upon contraction of tail. It digests the portion of host cell wall so that core tube can be penetrated into the host cell during infection.

Life Cycles of Bacteriophage
Bacteriophage shows two types of life cycles i.e., Lytic cycle and Lysogenic cycle. Infection process: The first step in the infection process is the adsorption of the phage to the bacterial cell. This step is mediated by the tail fibres and tail spikes. Phages attach to specific receptors on the bacterial cell. Penetration: The binding of the phage to the bacterium results in the contraction of the sheath and release of lysozyme that digest the portion of bacterial envelope. As a result the hollow core tube is pushed through the bacterial envelope. This insertion of core tube is called penetration. Genome injection: The penetration of core results into the injection of viral DNA in the bacterial cytoplasm whereas, the remainder of the phage remains on the outside of the bacterium.

Replication of Bacteriophage in Lytic Cycle
The bacteriophage that performs lytic cycle is called lytic or virulent phage because it immediately causes lysis (breakdown) of its host cell after its own multiplication. It develops Master-Slave relationship with the host cell because host genomic DNA is immediately disintegrated by the virally encoded DNA digesting enzyme (DNAase). Since viral DNA is already undergone certain chemical modification therefore, such enzymes do not affect it. The disintegration of host DNA enables the viral DNA to take over the control of the whole metabolic machinery of its host. In lytic cycle the subsequent steps are synthesis of phage components, assembly, maturation, lysis and release.

Soon after the disintegration of host DNA phage specified mRNAs and proteins are produced. Structural proteins (head, tail) that comprise the phage as well as the enzymes needed for lysis of the bacterial cell are separately synthesized. Nucleic acid is then packaged inside the head and then tail is added to the head. The assembly of phage components into mature infective phage particle is known as maturation. Within 20 to 25 minutes approximately 200 phage particles are produced. In lysis and release phase the bacterial cell ruptures due to the accumulation of the phage lysis protein i.e., lysozyme and phage particles are released into the medium.

Lysogenic Cycle
The bacteriophage that perform lysogenic cycle are called lysogenic or temperate phage. Such phages can either multiply via the lytic cycle or enter a dormant or latent state in the host. In this case the phage DNA integrates into the host chromosome and is replicated along with the host DNA. This integrated state of phage DNA is called prophage. The bacteria harboring prophage is called lysogenic bacteria. The process is known as lysogeny.

The lysogenic condition of a bacterium can get terminated anytime when it is exposed to unfavorable conditions. This process is called induction. Conditions that favour the termination of lysogeny are: desiccation, exposure to UV or ionizing radiation, exposure to mutagens, etc. The separated phage DNA then initiates lytic cycle resulting in cell lysis. Such phages are then capable of infecting new susceptible cells.

Usage of Bacteriophages in Genetic Engineering
Genetic engineering is the field of biotechnology in which alteration in genetic material of a cell is made such as transfer of gene from one organism to another. Several techniques are used in genetic engineering to accomplish the required task. Bacteriophage DNA has also been used as vector in genetic engineering. For example, bacteriophage has been used in the development of genomic library (a collection of bacterial clones which contain multiple copies of all the genes of an individual's genome).

Phage therapy is the application of genetically engineered phages that can kill pathogenic bacteria. Phage therapy has advantages over conventional antibiotic therapy because bacteriophages are fairly narrow in their spectrum of activity, meaning that with phage treatment it is possible to kill specific bacterial pathogens while avoiding harming of normal bacterial flora, i.e., our good bacteria. Bacteriophages have been used for many years as tools for the treatment of bacterial infections but recently a new application in the area of antibacterial nanomedicines has been discovered in which bacteriophages can be formulated as targeted drug-delivery vehicles.

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome or AIDS. It was identified (in 1984) by research team from Pasture institute in France and National Institute of Health in USA. The virus was named HIV (in 1986).

Structure of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is a retrovirus. It is spherical in shape. The outer covering is a lipoprotein envelope which consists of two layers of lipids; different proteins are embedded in the viral envelope, forming “spikes" consisting of the outer glycoprotein (gp) 120 and the transmembrane gp41. The lipid membrane is borrowed from the host cell during the budding process (formation of new particles). gp 120 is needed to attach to the host cell, and gp41 is critical for the cell fusion process. Beneath envelope another protein shell is present which is made up of matrix proteins. It lies between the envelope and capsid. The HIV capsid is somewhat conical shaped which is composed of capsomers. The viral core contains two single strands of HIV RNA and the enzymes needed for HIV replication, such as reverse transcriptase, integrase and protease. The reverse transcriptase enzyme is used to convert viral RNA genome into viral DNA, integrase enzyme is used to incorporate viral DNA into host DNA while the protease enzyme is used to break large viral proteins into smaller units.

Life Cycle of HIV
HIV infects T-helper cells (CD4 or T4 cells). In addition macrophages are also infected. The following steps are involved in the life cycle of HIV: (1) The initial step in the life cycle of HIV is adsorption/attachment which is mediated by the binding of the virion glycoprotein 120 envelope protein to the CD4 receptor on the surface of T4 cells. (2) Next the fusion of the viral envelope and host cell membrane takes place and the virion enters the cell by endocytosis. This leaves the viral capsid inside the cell. (3) Inside the host cell, the HIV particle sheds its protective coat i.e., uncoating. This releases the single stranded viral RNA in the cytoplasm along with viral enzymes. (4) The enzyme called reverse transcriptase synthesizes a single stranded DNA complementary to the viral RNA, called complementary DNA (cDNA). (5) After reverse transcription the viral genomic RNA is disintegrated by the ribonuclease (RNAase) enzyme. (6) The single stranded cDNA is replicated to form double stranded cDNA. (7) The double stranded cDNA then integrates into the host cell DNA. The integration is mediated by a virus encoded enzyme integrase. (8) The integrated DNA is now called provirus. (9 and 10) Viral mRNA is transcribed from the proviral DNA by host cell RNA polymerase. During transcription not only viral mRNAs for different protein are formed but viral genomic RNA is also produced. (11) The viral mRNAs are translated by host ribosomes into several large proteins, which are then cleaved by the virus-encoded protease to form the various structural proteins. (12) The viral components are assembled and many new virions are produced. (13) Finally, the mature virions are released by budding off from the host cell and enclosing a piece of host cell membrane around them. The host cell size is not reduced so that it becomes a virus-producing factory.

Symptoms of AIDS
HIV infection can be divided into 3 stages: Asymptomatic carrier, AIDS Related Complex (ARC), Full Blown AIDS. In asymptomatic carrier symptoms that may include are fever, chills, aches (continued pain), swollen lymph glands and an itchy rash. These symptoms disappear and there are no other symptoms for nine months or longer. Although the individual may exhibit no symptoms during this stage, he or she is highly infectious. The standard HIV blood test for the presence of antibody becomes positive during this stage.

The most common symptoms of AIDS related complex are swollen lymph glands in the neck, armpit or groin that persist for months. Other symptoms include night sweats, persistent cough, flu, and persistent diarrhoea, loss of memory and depression.

The full blown AIDS is the final stage. In it there is severe weight loss and weakness due to persistent diarrhoea and usually one of several opportunistic infections.

Opportunistic Diseases
HIV does not cause any disease nor kills any person. It only destroys T-cells of immune system. The decrease in the human immune system results in the inability of the body to fight diseases. Due to weak defence system a person suffering from AIDS is attacked by multiple diseases called opportunistic diseases, e.g., skin cancer, fungal infection, viral infection, gastrointestinal diseases, respiratory diseases, nervous system and eye diseases.

Treatment of AIDS
HIV is treated using a combination of medicines to fight HIV infection. This is called antiretroviral therapy (ART). ART is not a cure, but it can control the virus so that HIV positive person can live a longer, healthier life and reduce the risk of transmitting HIV to others. ART is a highly effective treatment for HIV infection, preventing progression of the disease in the vast majority of recipients. When ART is accessible and started early in the course of infection, the life span of HIV-positive people is typically very close to that of comparable HIV-negative people. But ART can have toxicities, is often costly, and requires strict daily pill taking that can affect quality of life. Because of the limitations of ART, a cure for HIV infection remains an important goal for research.

Control Measures Against the Transmission of HIV
AIDS can be controlled by preventing transfer of body fluid (blood, serum, semen, etc.) from patient to unaffected person. The following behavior of precautionary measure will help: (1) Do not use used syringes and needles. (2) For blood transfusion, blood must be screened for HIV. (3) Use disposable syringes. (4) Use proper sterilization of instruments at barbers shop or hair cutting saloons, beauty salons. (5) Avoid multiple sex partners. (6) Mother having HIV should not feed their babies. Shaking hands, using same toilets, door knobs, telephones, office equipment, sharing house hold furniture do not transmit HIV. AIDS is not transmitted by mosquitoes and other insects, as well as by sneezing and swimming in the same pool.

Viral Diseases
In this section we will describe Causative agent, symptoms, treatment, transmission and prevention of hepatitis, herpes, polio and cotton leaf curl disease.

Hepatitis
Hepatitis is a disease clinically characterized as inflammation of liver including other symptoms. It is usually due to viral infection or rarely due to toxicity of drugs and certain other causes. It may be acute (short infection, relatively rapid onset) or chronic (slowly progressing). The major causes of viral hepatitis are Hepatitis A, B, C, D and E.

Hepatitis "A": It is caused by HAV. Transmission: It is transmitted by the fecal-oral route. The typical symptoms are fever, loss of appetite and jaundice. Pale feces are also seen. Treatment: No antiviral treatment. Prevention: Active immunization with a vaccine is highly effective.

Hepatitis "B": It is caused by HBV. Symptoms: Jaundice. Transmission: The major modes of transmission are via blood, sexual contact and prenatally from mother to newborn. Treatment: Alpha interferon is effective. Prevention: Vaccine is highly effective in preventing hepatitis "B". All blood for transfusion should be screened.

Hepatitis "C": Cause: Hepatitis C is caused by Hepatitis C virus. Transmission: It is only transmitted via blood. Symptoms: Symptoms are just like hepatitis B. Treatment: A combination of alpha interferon and ribavirin is the treatment choice for chronic hepatitis C. Prevention: No vaccine is available. Blood transfusion should be screened as preventive measure.

Hepatitis "D": The only human disease known to be caused by a viroid is hepatitis D. Transmission: The hepatitis D viroid can only enter a human liver cell if it is enclosed in a capsid that contains a binding protein. It obtains this from the hepatitis B virus. The viroid then enters the blood stream and can be transmitted via blood or serum transfusions. Symptoms: As in hepatitis B but more severe. Treatment and Prevention: Same as HBV.

Hepatitis "E": It is caused by HEV. Transmission: Like HAV, it is also transmitted by the fecal-oral route. Treatment and Prevention: There is no antiviral treatment and vaccine. Observation of proper hygiene.

Herpes Simplex
Herpes simplex is a superficial viral infection characterized by one or more painful, fluid-filled sores or blisters (an elevation of the skin) appear on the skin or epithelium of outer openings of the body. Tingling, itching, or burning may be felt on the skin before the blisters appear. Blisters break open and often ooze fluid and form a crust, before healing. The sores can last from 7 to 10 days. There are two primary types of herpes i.e., oral herpes and genital herpes.

Oral Herpes: Cause: It is caused by herpes simplex virus type-1. Transmission: HSV Type-1, is transmitted primarily through oral secretions (saliva) or physical contact with sores on the skin. It can also be spread by sharing objects such as toothbrushes or eating utensils. Symptoms: Most blisters appear on the lips or around the mouth. Sometimes blisters form on the face or on the tongue. Treatment: Antiviral drugs are used to treat herpes. Prevention: Avoid contact with affected area of the patient.

Genital Herpes: Cause: It is caused by herpes simplex virus type-2. Transmission: In general, a person can only get HSV type 2 infection during sexual contact with someone who has genital HSV-2 infection. Symptoms: Blisters may occur in the area of the genitals, rectum, buttocks, or thighs. Prevention: Avoid contact with affected area of the patient.

Poliomyelitis
Cause: It is caused by polio virus which is also an enterovirus. Transmission: Polio virus is transmitted by the fecal oral route. Symptoms: It replicates in the oropharynx and intestinal tract and spread to blood and central nervous system where virus replicates in the motor neurone located in the spinal cord. Death of these cells results in paralysis of the muscles innervated by theses neuron. The motor nerve damage is permanent. Treatment: There is no antiviral therapy. Physiotherapy for the affected muscle is important. Prevention: Polio can be prevented by the killed (Salk vaccine, or injectable polio vaccine or IPV) and the live, attenuated (weakened) vaccine (sabin vaccine, or oral polio vaccine or OPV).

Cotton Leaf Curl Disease
Cotton leaf curl disease (CLCuD) is a serious disease of cotton. Cause: Begomoviruses. Transmission: This disease is transmitted by the whitefly. Symptoms: The symptoms are initially characterized by a deep downward cupping of the youngest leaves. This is followed by development of cup-shaped, leaf-like structures. Treatment and Prevention: Control of CLCuD is mainly based on insecticide treatments against the insect vector.

PRIONS AND VIROIDS
The idea of an infectious agent that did not use nucleic acids and proteins together was considered impossible, but pioneering work by Nobel Prize-winning biologist Stanley Prusiner has convinced the majority of biologists that such agents do indeed exist. Prions and viroids are such agents which are acellular infectious particles like viruses but are even simpler and smaller than viruses.

Prions
Prions, so-called because they are proteinaceous, are infectious particles, smaller than viruses, that contain no nucleic acids (neither DNA nor RNA). Electron microscopy reveals filaments rather than virus particles. Prions are much more resistant to inactivation by ultraviolet light and heat than are viruses. Prions are composed of a single protein. This protein is encoded by a single cellular gene. Fatal neurodegenerative diseases, such as Kuru in humans and in cattle mad cow disease were shown to be transmitted by prions.

Viroids
Viroids are plant pathogens that consist of a short, circular, single-stranded RNA without a protein coat or envelope. Viroid RNA does not code for any protein. The replication mechanism involves an enzyme RNA polymerase II, which synthesizes new RNA using the viroid's RNA as template. Some viroids are ribozymes, having catalytic properties which allow self-cleavage. The only human disease known to be caused by a viroid is hepatitis D. They cause several plant diseases, e.g., in potato, coconut, apple, peach, etc.