DIGESTION

INTRODUCTION
You have read about biological molecules or food. Food is necessary for living beings. It is utilized at the cellular level. Most of the food we eat, however, is unavailable for utilization until it is mechanically and chemically reduced to forms that can cross the intestinal wall and transported to the cells by the blood. This chapter presents an overview of the digestive system, describes its anatomy, physiology and disorders of the digestive system and food habits.

DIGESTIVE SYSTEM OF MAN

The digestive system can be divided into two main groups: the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and the accessory digestive organs. The organs of GIT are oral cavity, pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. The accessory organs are tongue, teeth, liver, gall bladder and pancreas.

STRUCTURE
The digestive tract, from the mouth to the anus, is a continuous tube that is modified at various points along its length, with each region performing a different role. GIT is approximately 9 m (30 ft) long. It passes through the abdominal cavity at the level of diaphragm.

The digestive tube consists of four major layers: an internal mucosa and an external serosa, with submucosa and muscularis in between. These four layers are present in all parts of the digestive tube from the oesophagus to the anus.

The mouth is surrounded by the cheeks, lips, tongue and a palate and forms a chamber between the palate and tongue called oral cavity. The tongue almost fills the oral cavity when the mouth is closed. Rough projections called papillae on the surface of the tongue cause friction, which is useful in manipulating the food. These papillae also contain taste buds. The palate forms the roof of the oral cavity. It consists of a hard anterior part the hard palate and a soft posterior part the soft palate. There are thirty two teeth. Different teeth are adapted to handle food in different ways. The incisors (front teeth) are chisel shaped and their sharp edges are used to bite off relatively large pieces of food. The canine teeth are cone shaped and they are useful in cutting or tearing or piercing food. The premolar and molars have broad surfaces and are adapted for grinding food particles. There are three pairs of salivary glands: parotid or parotis, submandibular and sublingual. These glands secrete saliva having only digestive enzymes.

In the oral cavity both mechanical and chemical digestion takes place. Mechanical digestion involves chewing food into smaller masses while chemical digestion involves enzymatic breakdown of food.

MASTICATION: Thorough chewing of food breaks the connective tissue covering and increases the exposed surface area of the food particles for the action of digestive enzymes. Food taken into the mouth is chewed, or masticated, by the teeth. Mastication breaks large pieces into smaller ones, which have a larger total surface area for the action of digestive enzymes. It also increases the surface area for the digestive enzymes.

INFLAMMATION OF PAROTID GLAND: Inflammation of parotid gland is called parotiditis or parotitis. The most common type of parotiditis is caused by a viral infection called mumps.

SALIVA SECRETION: Saliva is secreted by salivary glands. The watery part of saliva contains an enzyme called salivary amylase, which digests starch. Mucin is a proteoglycan that gives a lubricating quality to the secretions of the salivary glands. Saliva moistens food and mucous membrane. Saliva contains various mineral salts including chloride ions which speed up the activity of enzymes. Saliva prevents bacterial infection in the mouth as it contains lysozyme and immunoglobulin. Saliva has a pH between 6.00 and 7.0, a favourable range for the digestive action of amylase.

PHARYNX: The pharynx is a cavity behind the mouth.
The tongue forms the chewed and moistened food into a ball like mass called bolus and pushes it into the pharynx. Muscles raise the soft palate against the back wall of the pharynx, which closes the passage between nasal cavity and pharynx, preventing food from entering the nasal cavity. The pressure of the food in the pharynx stimulates nerves in its walls and initiates the swallowing reflex, an involuntary action. As part of this reflex action the voice box larynx rises up to meet the epiglottis, with this action epiglottis cartilage drops over the opening to the larynx and trachea. In this way food is passed over the trachea without entering it. After food enters the oesophagus, the soft palate lowers and the epiglottis is raised.

OESOPHAGUS: The oesophagus is that part of the digestive tube that extends between the pharynx and the stomach. It is about 25 cm long. It begins at the base of the pharynx and descends behind the trachea. The oesophagus penetrates the diaphragm and is continuous with the stomach.

Function: Digestion which started in the oral cavity continues in the oesophagus. As oesophagus is a passage way so no digestion takes place here.

PERISTALSIS: The movement of food is followed by relaxation of the tube wall and the contraction of circular muscles behind the bolus. The wave of relaxation of the tube wall followed by the wave of contraction of circular muscles that propels the mass of the bolus forward along the digestive tract. As the food enters and expands the tube wall, the pressure stimulates peristalsis. Sometimes, the direction of peristalsis become opposite in direction, and is called antiperistalsis that leads to vomiting.

STOMACH
The stomach is an enlarged segment of the digestive tract in the left superior part of the abdomen immediately below the diaphragm.
When empty, the stomach is continuous with the oesophagus at the cardiac opening (located near the heart). The stomach consists of three major regions: the cardiac region, the body, and the pyloric region.

A cross section of the stomach wall illustrates its histology, including several gastric pits and glands.

The serosa is the outer most layer of the stomach. The muscularis of the stomach consists of three layers: an outer longitudinal layer, a middle circular layer and an inner oblique layer. The next two layers are submucosa and mucosa. The stomach is lined with simple columnar epithelium. The mucosal surface forms numerous tube like gastric pits, which are openings for the gastric glands. The epithelial cells of stomach can be divided into four general types. The first type is surface mucous cells, which produce mucus, is on the surface and within the gastric pit. The remaining three are in the gastric gland. They are: (1) Parietal (Oxyntic) cells produce hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factors (2) Chief (Zymogenic) cells produce pepsinogen (3) Endocrine cells secrete the hormone gastrin into the blood.

FUNCTIONS OF STOMACH
Digestion in the stomach can be divided into two types: mechanical digestion and chemical digestion.

Mechanical Digestion: The mixing action of the stomach walls allows mechanical digestion in the stomach. The smooth muscles of the stomach produce contractions called mixing waves. This is made more efficient by the fact that unlike other region of the digestive tract, stomach has three layers of smooth muscles. The churning action of the stomach helps to mix the boluses of food with gastric juice. This mixing leads to the production of a thick liquid known as chyme.

Gastric Juice: Stomach secretions include mucus, hydrochloric acid, pepsinogen.

The mucous cells secrete viscous and alkaline mucus. This mucus protects the epithelial cells of the stomach wall against the damaging effect of acidic gastric juice.

Hydrochloric acid produces the low pH of the stomach, which is normally close to 2. Although the hydrochloric acid exerted has a minor digestive effect on digested food, one of its main functions is to kill bacteria that are ingested with essentially everything humans put into their mouths. The low pH also stops carbohydrate digestion by inactivating salivary amylase. The low pH denatures many proteins so that proteolytic enzymes can reach internal peptide bonds. It also provides the proper pH environment for the function of pepsin.

Chief cells within the gastric glands secrete inactive pepsinogen. Pepsinogen is stored in zymogen granules, which are released by exocytosis when pepsinogen secretion is stimulated. Once pepsinogen enters the lumen of the stomach, it is converted to pepsin by hydrochloric acid and previously formed pepsin molecules. Pepsin exhibits optimum enzymatic activity at a pH of 3 or less. Pepsin catalyzes the cleavage of some covalent bonds in proteins, breaking them into smaller peptide chains.

Role of nervous system and gastrin hormone on the secretion of gastric juice:
Approximately 2-3 litres of gastric juice are produced each day. Both nervous and hormonal mechanisms regulate gastric secretions. Hormones that regulate stomach secretions include gastrin, secretin, gastric inhibitory polypeptide, and cholecystokinin.

The sensations of the taste and smell of food, stimulation of tactile receptors during the process of chewing and swallowing, and pleasant thoughts of food stimulate centres within the medulla that influences gastric secretion. Neuronal stimulation of the stomach mucosa results in the secretion of acetylcholine, which stimulates the secretory activity of both the parietal and chief cells and stimulates the secretion of gastrin from endocrine cells. Gastrin is released into the circulation and travels to the parietal cells, where it stimulates additional hydrochloric acid secretion.

The greatest volume of gastric secretions is initiated by the presence of food in the stomach. The primary stimuli are distention of the stomach and the presence of amino acids and peptides in the stomach. Peristaltic waves occur less frequently, are significantly more forceful than mixing waves, and force the chyme near the periphery of the stomach toward the pyloric sphincter. The pyloric sphincter usually remains partially closed because of mild tonic contraction. Each peristaltic contraction is sufficiently strong to force a small amount of chyme through the pyloric opening and into the duodenum.

SMALL INTESTINE
Small intestine consists of three parts: the duodenum, the jejunum and the ileum. It is about 6 m long.

DUODENUM: Duodenum is the first part of small intestine. It is about 25 cm in length. Here food from the stomach mixes with secretions from the pancreas and the liver. The most important enzymes are (a) Pancreatic amylase: It hydrolyses the polysaccharides into maltose. It is the most powerful starch digesting enzyme. It hydrolyses starch to maltose. (b) Pancreatic lipase: It is the principal enzyme for the hydrolysis of fats (triglycerides). It hydrolyses fats into monoglycerides, diglycerides, glycerol and fatty acids. (c) Proteases: Important enzyme precursors are found in pancreatic juice. They are trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen. Both are the inactive forms.

The intestinal glands secrete an activator enzyme called enterokinase. The enterokinase converts trypsinogen into trypsin. Trypsin then activates more trypsinogen. The active trypsin then activates more trypsinogen. The active trypsin then activates chymotrypsinogen into its active digestive form, which acts on proteins and converts them into polypeptides.

BILE: Bile is manufactured in liver but stored in gall bladder. Bile contains no digestive enzymes. Bile emulsifies fat causing large globules to break into numerous small droplets called micelles. Emulsification provides relatively large surface area of lipid for the action of lipase enzyme and speed up the digestion of fats and oils.

JEJUNUM AND ILEUM:
Jejunum is about 2.5 m long and ileum is about 3.5 m long. Here the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates and fats is completed. The lining of the jejunum and ileum secrete several enzymes: Erepsin: It splits peptides into amino acids. Lactase: It converts lactose to glucose and galactose. Maltase: It converts maltose to glucose. Sucrase: it converts sucrose to glucose and fructose. Pancreatic lipase: It completes the digestion of fats into fatty acids and glycerol.

By the action of these enzymes, chyme is turned into a watery emulsion called chyle.

ABSORPTION OF DIGESTED FOOD FROM THE LUMEN OF INTESTINE
Small intestine is the major site of nutrient absorption. Tiny finger like projections of the mucosa called villi, which are 0.5-1.5 mm in length. Each villus is covered by simple columnar epithelium and contains a blood capillary network and a lymph capillary called lacteal. Villi greatly increase the surface area of small intestine and make it more efficient. Intestinal walls are folded to increase surface area.

ABSORPTION OF CARBOHYDRATES:
Absorption occurs by a combination of simple diffusion and active transport. The monosaccharides are transferred by facilitated diffusion to the blood capillaries of intestinal villi and are carried by the hepatic portal system to the liver, where non-glucose sugars are converted to glucose. Glucose enters the capillaries through facilitated diffusion.

ABSORPTION OF LIPIDS:
Lipids digest into fatty acids and glycerol. Glycerol and fatty acid are absorbed by epithelial cells. They are recombined into fats within the epithelial cells. They are then mixed with cholesterol and phospholipids forming small globules called chylomicrons, most of which are transported by exocytosis from the basal surface of epithelial cells into lacteals. Lymph containing chylomicrons eventually drains from the lymphatic system into the blood.

ABSORPTION OF PROTEINS:
Proteins are absorbed in epithelial cells of villi by active transport and carried by blood capillaries to liver and then to body cells. Amino acids are used for making new proteins, but some amino acids may be used for energy production.

LARGE INTESTINE
The junction between ileum and large intestine is ileocecal junction guarded by ileocecal valve. The caecum, which is the proximal end of the large intestine, is where the large and small intestine meet. Attached to the caecum is a small blind tube about 9 cm long called vermiform appendix. The walls of the appendix contain many lymph nodules. The colon is about 1.5 m long and consists of four parts: the ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. The rectum is a straight, muscular tube that begins at the termination of the sigmoid colon and ends at the anus guarded by sphincter.

FUNCTIONS OF LARGE INTESTINE:
The large intestine performs several important functions. The major functions of the large intestine are: (a) Absorbing water and electrolytes (b) Absorption of vitamins (c) Neutralizing acidity and protecting from infections.

Absorbing water and electrolytes: Further digestion or breaking down of nutrients does not take place in the large intestine. The proximal half of the large intestine functions to reabsorb most of the water and electrolytes making the stools solid. The substances that remain in the lumen becomes faeces, which is stored for a time in the distal portion of the large intestine.

Absorption of vitamins: The large intestine also helps in absorption of vitamins made by bacteria that normally live in the large intestine. These bacteria also produce large amounts of vitamins. The most important of these is Vitamin K and Biotin (a B vitamin).

Neutralizing acidity and protecting from infections: The mucosa of the large intestine also: (a) secretes bicarbonates to neutralize the increased acidity resulting from the formation of fatty acids and other digestive components at earlier parts of the intestines. (b) Acts as a barrier and protect from microbial infections and invasions.

DEFECATION:
When appropriate, a person usually can initiate the defecation reflex (also called bowel movement) by holding a deep breath and contracting the abdominal muscles. This increases the internal pressure and forces the faeces into the rectum. When the rectum is filled, its wall is distended and the defecation reflex is triggered. A wave of peristalsis in the descending colon is stimulated, and the internal and external anal sphincter is signalled to relax and the faeces are expelled. The reflex persists only for a few minutes and quickly dies. A person can inhibit defecation by keeping the external sphincter contracted.

ACCESSORY ORGANS:
Accessory organs of the digestive system are liver, gall bladder and pancreas.

LIVER:
Liver is the largest internal organ of the body. The liver consists of two major lobes and two minor lobes.

Secretion of bile: The liver produces and secretes bile. It is stored in the gall bladder. Bile contains no digestive enzymes. Bile consists of water, bile salts sodium glycocholate and sodium taurocholate, bile pigment bilirubin, cholesterols, lecithin (a phospholipid) mucus, cells and salts.

Role of constituents of bile: Bile salts reduce the surface tension of fat globules and emulsify them into droplets and thus increase their total surface area. This process is called emulsification. These small droplets are then acted upon by lipase enzyme. Bilirubin results from the breakdown of hemoglobin. In the intestine, bacteria convert bilirubin to pigments that give the faeces its characteristic brown colour. Some of these pigments are absorbed from the intestine, modified in the kidneys and excreted in the urine, contributing to the characteristic yellowish colour of the urine. Bile salts help in the absorption of fatty acids from the intestinal tract.

Secretion of bile is related to secretin hormone:
Fatty acids in the lumen of the duodenum stimulate endocrine cells to release the hormone cholecystokinin (CCK). CCK stimulates contractions in the smooth muscle of the gall bladder allowing bile release into the duodenum.
Acidic chyme in the lumen of the duodenum stimulates other endocrine cells to release the hormone secretin. Secretin produced by the duodenum is carried through the circulatory system to the liver and stimulates liver to release bicarbonate into the bile.

FUNCTIONS OF LIVER:
The liver performs important digestive and excretory functions, stores and processes nutrients, synthesizes new molecules and detoxifies harmful chemicals.

Storage role of liver: Hepatocytes can remove sugar from the blood and store it in the form of glycogen. They can also store fat, vitamins (A, B12, D, E, and K), copper and iron. This storage is usually short-term and the amount of stored material in the hepatocytes varies and liver size fluctuates during a given day.

Metabolic role of liver: The metabolism of glucose occurs in liver. Whenever needed, it breaks glycogen into glucose (glycogenolysis). Glucose is also synthesized from non-carbohydrates (gluconeogenesis). Deamination of amino acids also occurs in liver cells. Excess of amino acids is deaminated. Deamination of amino acids produces keto acids and ammonia. Ammonia produced by deamination of amino acids is converted into urea (ornithine-arginine cycle).
Synthesis of vitamin A from carotene and synthesis of albumin from amino acids takes place in liver. Many of the blood proteins (like prothrombin, fibrinogen) are synthesized in liver which are necessary for blood clotting. Phagocytosis also occurs in liver i.e., dead erythrocytes are destroyed. The bile pigments bilirubin (orange pigment) and biliverdin (green pigment) are formed from the breakdown of haemoglobin. Liver produces heparin, an anticoagulant that prevents clotting of blood inside the blood vessels. Red blood cells are formed in foetal life. Detoxification occurs in liver.

GALL BLADDER:
The gall bladder is a saclike structure on the inferior surface of the liver that is about 8 cm long and 4 cm wide. The gall bladder is connected to the common bile duct by the cystic duct. Bile is continually secreted by the liver.

PANCREAS:
Pancreas is a complex organ composed of both endocrine and exocrine tissues. It is located posterior to the spleen. The endocrine portion produces the hormones insulin and glucagon. The exocrine portion produces pancreatic juice.

COMPOSITION OF PANCREATIC JUICE:
Pancreatic juice consists of an aqueous bicarbonate component and an enzymatic component. Bicarbonate neutralizes the acidic chyme entering the small intestine from the stomach. The enzymatic component contains enzymes important for the digestion of all major classes of food. The major proteolytic enzymes are trypsin, chymotrypsin, and carboxypeptidase. These are secreted in their inactive forms as trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and procarboxypeptidase and are activated by the removal of certain peptides from the larger precursor proteins. If these were produced in their active forms, they would digest the tissues that produce them. Trypsinogen is activated by the proteolytic enzyme enterokinase into trypsin. Trypsin then activates more trypsinogen, as well as chymotrypsinogen and procarboxypeptidase. Amylase continues the polysaccharide digestion that was initiated in the oral cavity. Pancreatic lipases breakdown lipids into free fatty acids, glycerides, and cholesterol. Deoxyribonucleases and ribonucleases reduce DNA and ribonucleic acid to their component nucleotides, respectively.

SECRETION OF PANCREATIC JUICE AND SECRETIN HORMONE:
Pancreatic juice secretion is regulated by the hormones secretin and cholecystokinin which are produced by the walls of the duodenum upon detection of acid food, proteins, fats and vitamins. Pancreatic secretion consists of an aqueous bicarbonate component from the duct cells and enzymatic component from the acinar cells. A clear alkaline secretion of the pancreas containing enzymes that aid in the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. The predominant effect of secretin on the pancreas is to stimulate duct cells to secrete water and bicarbonate. As soon as this occurs, the enzymes secreted by the acinar cells are flushed out of the pancreas, through the pancreatic duct into the duodenum.

DISORDERS OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEM:
Here we will describe causes, prevention and treatment of the disorders related to digestive system and food habits: ulcer, food poisoning, dyspepsia, obesity, anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.

PEPTIC ULCER:
Peptic ulcer is classically viewed as a condition in which the stomach acids damage the mucosal lining of the GI tract itself. Helicobacter pylori is the most important factor in ulcer development, accounting for 90% of duodenal ulcer and 70% of the gastric ulcer. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are an important cause of peptic ulcer. Peptic ulcer tends to run in families i.e., it is a hereditary disease. Other risk factors such as smoking, aspirin, excess intake of coffee should be avoided.

Treatment: Mainstay of treatment are antacid like milk, anticholinergic drugs, drugs which reduce acid production such as Cimetidine, antibiotics to kill bacteria.

FOOD POISONING:
It includes diarrhoea, vomiting and abdominal pain. It is an illness from ingestion of food containing toxic substances.

Aetiology: Due to the toxins produced by bacteria, Salmonella and Campylobacter.

Prevention: Basic hygiene should be followed. Avoid unboiled / unbottled water, ice, cubes, salads and peel on fruits. Consume freshly prepared hot food or thoroughly rewarmed food.

Treatment: Soft easily digested diet, such as soup, fruits drinks, tea and cold drinks are preferred. Oral rehydration salt (ORS) is given. Antidiarrhoeal agent such as Loperamide, antibiotics are prescribed.

DYSPEPSIA:
Incomplete or imperfect digestion is called dyspepsia.

Aetiology: It may occur due to excessive acidity in stomach or faulty function of stomach and intestine or insufficient quality and quantity of bile secretion.

Prevention: Avoid food that worsens symptoms. Stop smoking, weight reduction, small meals, avoid alcohol, tea, fatty food, heavy lifting, bending specially after meals and late night meals to avoid acid reflex during sleep.

Treatment: Antibiotics to be given against this disease. Drugs which decrease acid production such as Cimetidine; stop NSAID (Non-Steroidal Anti inflammatory Drugs); use antacids.

OBESITY:
When a person has an abnormal amount of fat on the body it is called obesity.

BULIMIA NERVOSA:
It is a neurotic disorder in slightly older girls. It is characterized by bouts of overeating of fattening food such as fried food or cream cakes. This voracious overeating is followed immediately by self-induced vomiting, fasting or purging (to empty bowel). This may cause physical effects including serum electrolytes imbalance and frequent vomiting infections.

Treatment: Treatment of bulimics is likely to be prolonged. The initial treatment is to overcome the effects of weight loss and malnutrition. It is necessary to undertake the treatment in hospital under strict supervision.

ANOREXIA NERVOSA:
It is the loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming obese. Such a feeling is common in young females between the ages of 12 and 21 years. Usually just after the onset of puberty.

Symptoms: It includes loss of appetite due to the fear of becoming obese. The anorexic girl over estimates the size of her own body and so insists that she is overweight, when in reality her weight has dropped to a dangerous level. These girls are often not matured psychologically and unable to cope with the challenges of puberty and their emerging sexuality. The losses of feminine characteristics enable the girls to retreat into a childlike state in which she feels safe.

Therapy: Psychiatric therapy is usually required to treat anorexic girls. Such patients are fed through any other route other than alimentary canal, i.e., intravenously. The recovery is usually slow over 2-4 years and in some cases longer.

Science Technology and Society Connections:
Relate food poisoning and dyspepsia with eating habits of the society.