Diversity among animals


INVERTEBRATES
Animals are diverse in structure. There are the vast differences in structural complexity of animals from the simplest sponges to humans.

Invertebrates: The animal species that lack a backbone are commonly known as invertebrates. They account for 95% of known animal species. The invertebrates have been divided into following phyla: porifera, cnidaria, platyhelminthes, aschelminthes, mollusca, annelida, arthropoda and echinodermata.

Phylum Porifera (pore bearer)
General characteristics of phylum porifera: Sponges are sessile, attached but their larvae are motile. Sponges are all aquatic, mostly marine, a few live in freshwater. Their size varies from a few millimetre wide to more than a metre tall.
They have cellular level of organization and not organized as tissue or organs. Body lacks symmetry. The body wall consists of outer dermal layer called pinacoderm, and inner layer choanoderm made up of flagellated cells called choanocytes. The middle region is called mesenchyme. Body is perforated by many pores called ostia. There is a single cavity inside the body called spongocoel. Water enters through ostia travels through the canal and goes out by a large terminal opening called osculum. Sponges depend on food coming along with water currents. Various shapes of spicules form the skeleton. These are needle like and may be calcareous or siliceous. The bath sponge has spongin fibre.
Asexual reproduction takes place by budding or gemmules. Buds develop into new sponges. Sexual reproduction takes place by egg and sperm. Sexes may be separate or hermaphrodite. The embryo development includes free swimming ciliated larval stages. Sponges have remarkable ability of regeneration from a small fragment.
Sponges have evolved from the protists called choanoflagellates. The examples of sponges are: Spongilla, Sycon, etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in sponges: (1) Digestion: It is completely intracellular i.e., food vacuoles within the cell. (2) Transportation: It occurs by water current system. (3) Respiration and Excretion: It takes place through diffusion. (4) Excretion: It takes place through water current. (5) Nervous system: A sponge lacks nervous system. There is an ability to coordinate the flow of water. Sponges seem to have only response to chemical stimuli.

Importance of sponges: Skeleton of sponges are used for washing and bathing because of great capacity to absorb water. They are used in surgical operations for soaking fluids and blood. Sponges are used for sound absorption in buildings.

Phylum Cnidaria (stinging celled organisms)
General characteristics of phylum cnidaria: Cnidarians are entirely aquatic, mostly marine, few found in freshwater, e.g., Hydra. Most of the species are sessile, e.g., Hydra, others are free living and motile e.g., Jelly fish. Some are colonial e.g., Obelia. They range in size from microscopic (Hydra) to two metres in length (jelly fish). Body symmetry: radial symmetry. Cnidarians are diploblastic animals having ectoderm, endoderm and mesoglea in between the two. They have a sac like internal gastrovascular cavity, which has only one opening the mouth. The mouth is often surrounded by tentacles. Tentacles and body is provided with stinging cell organelles called nematocysts.
Asexual reproduction takes place by budding and sexual reproduction by gametes. Cnidarians also occur in the form of colonies. The units of the colonies are called zooids. There are two main types of zooids. Polyps which are feeding zooids and Medusae are reproductive zooids, for sexual reproduction.

Evolutionary adaptations in cnidarians: (1) Digestion: Gastrovascular cavity is often branched or divided with septa with a single opening. (2) Transportation and excretion: Takes place through diffusion. (3) Respiration and Excretion: There is no respiratory and excretory system. (4) Nervous system: Nervous system consists of nerve net and sensory organs.

Importance of cnidarians: Coral reefs protect shores from erosion by water waves.

Phylum Platyhelminthes (flatworms)
General characteristics of phylum platyhelminthes: The flatworms are free living, predators, or parasite, e.g., Tapeworm. They are found in freshwater, marine, animal gut, damp places. Body is soft and flattened dorsoventrally. Platyhelminthes are triploblastic and exhibit bilateral symmetry. Body cavity, coelom is absent, and the spaces are filled with mesenchyme tissue. Locomotion is not significant in some flatworms. Free living forms are motile. They have ability of regeneration of the animals, e.g., Planaria. In parasitic forms locomotion is restricted. Reproduction both by asexual and sexual means, Asexual by fission, budding, fragmentation. Sexual reproduction by copulation. Hermaphrodite.
The examples of flatworms are: Dugesia (Planaria), Fasciola (liver fluke), Taenia (tapeworm).

Evolutionary adaptations in platyhelminthes: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is incomplete gastrovascular cavity, having only one opening to the exterior, the mouth. (2) Respiration: Respiratory system is absent. (3) Transport: Transport system is absent. (4) Excretion: Excretory system consists of two lateral canals with branches bearing flame cells (protonephridia). (5) Nervous system: Nervous system consists of a pair of anterior ganglia with longitudinal nerve cords.

Importance of platyhelminthes: The parasitic species of flukes and tapeworms are very harmful to man, e.g., tapeworm, liver fluke, the blood fluke of cattle etc.

Phylum Aschelminthes (roundworms)
General characteristics of phylum aschelminthes: The roundworms are free living or parasitic and in soil, roots, human and animal intestine and muscles. Most roundworms are less than five cm long and many are microscopic but some parasitic roundworms are more than one metre in length.
Roundworms exhibit bilateral symmetry, having three germ layers. Body is cylindrical with tapering ends. Muscular layer is not continuous. It is divided into four longitudinal bands i.e., two dorsolateral, two ventrolateral. The body cavity is pseudocoelom. Fertilization is internal.

Evolutionary adaptations in aschelminthes: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is complete with mouth and anus at opposite ends. (2) Respiration: It takes place through body surface by diffusion. (3) Transport: Transport is absent, circulation through pseudocoelomic fluid. (4) Excretion: Excretory system consists of renette gland cells and excretory canals. (5) Nervous system: Nervous system consists of circum pharyngeal nerve ring connected with ganglia and longitudinal nerve cords.

Importance of aschelminthes: Ascaris lumbricoides is an intestinal parasite of man. Pinworms (Enterobius vermicularis) are parasites in the human caecum, colon and appendix causing insomnia and loss of appetite.

Phylum Mollusca (soft bodied animals)
General characteristics of phylum mollusca: They are free living or sessile, and live in freshwater, marine and land (in moist places). The molluscs exhibit bilateral symmetry, are triploblastic, coelomate, soft and unsegmented animals. Body is divided into head, ventral muscular foot, dorsal visceral region. The whole animal is covered in an envelope called mantle. It secretes the shell. The shell may be external (snail), internal (cuttle fish) or even absent (octopus). Mouth cavity may have a tongue like structure called radula, e.g., Cuttle fish, snail. Coelom is divided into sinuses. Sexes may be separate, e.g., Unio or united, e.g., Helix. The development takes place through trochophore larvae. The examples of molluscs are snail, slug, oyster, freshwater mussel and Octopus etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in molluscs: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is complete, partly emptying into mantle cavity. (2) Respiration: Respiration through gills, under mantle or body surface. (3) Transport: Open circulatory system with heart and blood vessels. (4) Excretion: There are one or two kidneys which open into the pericardial cavity. (5) Nervous system: The nervous system consists of cerebral, pleural, pedal and visceral ganglia with nerve cord.

Importance of molluscs: Shell of freshwater mussels are used in button making. They are also used for making ornaments. Some oysters make valuable pearls. Shells are used in poultry feeds. Clams, oyster, mussels are source of food in Far East, Europe, America etc. Slugs and snails are injurious in garden and cultivation. Teredo a shipworm damage wooden parts in ships.

Phylum Annelida (segmented worms)
General characteristics of phylum annelida: The annelids are called segmented worms. They are free living (Earthworm) or ectoparasite (leech). They are found in soil, freshwater and marine e.g., Nereis. Body is metamerically segmented. Coelom is a true coelom divided into compartments. The coelomic fluid of the adjacent chambers serves as a hydrostatic skeleton also. The body wall consists of outer circular and inner longitudinal muscles used in locomotion. The organs of locomotion are chaetae (setae) present in the body wall of Nereis. The circulatory system of the annelids is closed. Sexes are separate in some annelids, e.g., Nereis. Others are hermaphrodite e.g., earthworm. Fertilization is external or internal. The examples are Pheretima (Earthworm), Hirudinaria (leech).

Evolutionary adaptations in annelids: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is complete with mouth and anus. (2) Respiration: Respiration takes place through skin. (3) Transport: Closed circulatory system with dorsal and ventral vessels. (4) Excretion: Excretion takes place through nephridia. (5) Nervous system: Central nervous system consists of nerve ring and nerve cord, which extends throughout the body.

Importance of annelids: Earthworms form an important food item for many birds and fish. Earthworms help in soil improvement. Leech is an ectoparasite to man and cattle.

Phylum Arthropoda (animals with jointed legs)
General characteristics of phylum arthropoda: The arthropods are called joint footed animals. They are free living or parasites and are found in all types of habitat. The body is segmented. Some are worm like and others are flying insects. Segments are modified, specialized and fused variously distinct or fused. Body is covered by chitin. It is flexible at many places to allow articulation. There are several pairs of appendages. Coelom is not present as the main body cavity. It is reduced and is called haemocoel, because it is connected with the blood vascular system. Alimentary canal has two openings, the mouth and anus. Skeleton is exoskeleton, formed chiefly of chitin. Muscles are attached to exoskeleton for locomotion. Sexes are separate in arthropods. The male and female arthropods are often alike. The reproductive organs and ducts are paired. The testes produce sperms and ovaries produce eggs. Fertilization is mostly internal. Development takes place through metamorphosis.

Evolutionary adaptations in arthropods: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is complete. (2) Respiration: Respiratory system consists of air tubes called trachea. Spiders have book lungs. Some forms have book lungs (e.g., spiders) or air tube (trachea) for respiration. (3) Transport: Circulatory system consists of dorsal contractile heart (blood is without haemoglobin). (4) Excretion: Excretion takes place by Malpighian tubules and solid uric acid is excreted. (5) Nervous system: Nervous system is well developed. There is a brain and a ventral double nerve cord. There is a ganglion in each segment from which nerves arise.

Importance of arthropods: Lobsters, crayfish and prawns are eaten as food. Many arthropods act as intermediate hosts for human parasites, e.g., Cyclops carries larvae of Guinea worm. Honey and bee’s wax are produced by the honeybee and silk is produced by silkworm. Insects aid in the production of fruits, seeds and vegetables by pollinating flowers. Fruit fly (Drosophila), cockroach, grasshopper are abundantly used as laboratory animals for scientific learning and research. Insects destroy field crops, fruit trees and timber. They spread diseases among human beings. Bees and wasp’s sting, mosquitoes, lice and fleas bite and suck blood. Scorpions and a few spiders are poisonous and sting.

Phylum Echinodermata (spiny skinned animals)
General characteristics of phylum echinodermata: They are free living; some are attached to the substratum. The echinoderms are exclusively marine. Most are found at the bottom along the shorelines in shallow seas. Body is covered by delicate epidermis. The echinoderms are triploblastic coelomates and exhibit radial symmetry in adult. Echinoderms have an endoskeleton consisting of spine bearing calcium rich plates. The spines, which stick out through the delicate skin, account for their name. The mouth is on the oral side and anus is on the aboral side. There is a central disc from which arms radiate. The body may be flattened like biscuit (cake urchin), star-shaped with short arm (starfish) globular (sea urchin), star-shaped with long arms (brittle star) or elongated (sea cucumber). Coelom consists of canals and spaces, and one of which forms water vascular system. Organs of locomotion are the tube feet. These are present along the arms of grooves present in the arms. Sexes are separate. The fertilization is external. The larvae as bipinnaria and brachiolaria are free swimming. The regeneration is shown by the adult and larvae. The examples are starfish, sea cucumber, brittle star and sea urchin.

Evolutionary adaptations in echinoderms: (1) Digestion: Digestive system is usually complete, axial or in ophiuroids absent. (2) Respiration: Respiration is performed by dermal branchiae, tube feet, respiratory tree e.g., sea cucumber and bursae e.g., spiny brittle star. (3) Transport: Blood vascular system is much reduced. (4) Excretion: Excretory organs are absent. (5) Nervous system: Nervous system includes a circumoral nerve ring and radial nerve cords. There is no brain.

Economic importance of echinoderms: Many echinoderms are used as food. Dried skeleton of echinoderms are used as fertilizer because of their high percentage of calcium and nitrogen. Starfishes act as scavengers and thus clean seawater. They cause damage to oyster beds. The stinging sea urchins are poisonous.

Phylum Hemichordata (acorn worm)
Characteristics of both echinoderms and chordates and both groups are placed in deuterostome branch of animal kingdom. Hemichordates are placed near chordates because of their close relationship to chordates. Examples: Balanoglossus, Saccoglossus.

General characteristics of phylum hemichordata: The hemichordates are called acorn worms. All hemichordates are marine. Some are solitary, naked and slow moving; others are sedentary. Body is soft and unsegmented and has a worm like form. Body has three distinct regions: proboscis, collar and trunk. Symmetry is bilateral and hemichordates are triploblastic. Body cavity is a true coelom. Excretory system comprises of a glomerulus situated in the proboscis and connected with blood vessels. There are no nephridia. Sexes may be separate or united. Fertilization is external. Development may include free swimming larval stage.

Evolutionary adaptations in hemichordates: (1) Respiration: It occurs by gill slits connecting the pharynx with outside as in chordates. (2) Circulatory system: It includes a heart and two longitudinal vessels, a dorsal and a ventral, interconnected by sinus. Blood is colourless and without corpuscles. (3) Nervous system: It is diffuse composed of epidermal plexus of nerve cells and nerve fibres.

Phylum Chordata
The phylum chordata called the chordates, are the most familiar and the most widely distributed animals, showing diversity of form.

Main Features of Chordates
Chordates possess four basic characteristics, which are: (a) notochord (b) dorsal hollow nerve cord (c) pharyngeal slits (d) post anal tail.
Notochord: The notochord is an internal, flexible, rod like structure. It is present below the dorsal hollow nerve cord and above the alimentary canal. It is present throughout or part of length of the animal.
Dorsal hollow nerve cord: Central nervous system of chordates consists of a single, tubular, fluid filled, nongangliated nerve cord situated along the mid dorsal line above the notochord and outside the coelom.
Pharyngeal slits: The gill slits (pharyngeal clefts) are paired perforations on the lateral sides of the anterior part of the digestive tract, leading from the pharynx to exterior.
Post anal tail: It extends beyond the anus, at least in embryo, but in many adult chordates it is vestigial.

Classification of Chordates
The phylum chordata has been subdivided into two groups: (a) Protochordata or Acrania in which brain is not enclosed in bony case (b) Craniata in which brain is enclosed in bony case and notochord has been replaced by vertebral column.

Group Protochordata (Acrania)
Phylum protochordata has been divided into two sub-phyla: (i) Subphylum urochordata, (ii) Subphylum cephalochordata.
Subphylum Urochordata: The body is covered by a covering called tunic and called tunicates. On the outside are two openings, incurrent siphon which corresponds to mouth and excurrent siphon corresponds to anus. The larva has a mid-dorsal hollow nerve cord and notochord in the tail, so the group is named urochordata. In the adult, the notochord is lost.
Subphylum Cephalochordata: Body is fish like. It has no head but tail is present. Notochord extends the entire length of the body. There is no organ for respiration. The example of cephalochordate is: Amphioxus.

Group Craniata
Group craniata has one subphylum i.e., vertebrata.

Subphylum Vertebrata
The characteristics that give the member of this group the names “vertebrata” and “craniates” are spinal column of vertebrae, which encloses the dorsal nerve cord, brain enclosed in a skull or cranium of the body, and a well developed head. Subphylum vertebrata is divided into two superclasses: (a) Agnatha (b) Gnathostomata.

Superclass Agnatha (Jawless fishes)
General characteristics of super class agnatha: It is divided into two classes: Myxini and Cephalaspidomorphi. Body slender, eel-like, and rounded with naked skin. There is no median fin in class Myxini. There are one or two median fins in class Cephalaspidomorphi. The caudal fin extends anteriorly to the cloaca. Endoskeleton is cartilaginous and the notochord is persistent.
Diagnostic characteristics of super class agnatha: Buccal funnel and toothed tongue: form of jaws. There are five to sixteen gills for respiration in class Myxini, seven pairs of gills each with external gill opening in class Cephalaspidomorphi. Dorsal nerve cord with differentiated brain. No paired appendages.

Superclass Gnathostomata
It is divided into six classes: Chondrichthyes, Osteichthyes, Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia.

Class Chondrichthyes (Cartilaginous fishes)
General characteristics of class chondrichthyes: Body is laterally compressed and streamlined (fusiform) shaped. Mouth is ventral. Olfactory sacs are not connected to mouth cavity. Skin is tough and covered with minute placoid scale. The pectoral and pelvic fins are paired. There are one or two dorsal fins. The caudal fin is heterocercal. Endoskeleton is cartilaginous. Digestive tract leads into the cloaca. Stomach is J shaped. The circulatory system consists of two-chambered heart. There is one atrium and one ventricle. There are five pairs of aortic arches. Respiratory system includes 5-7 pairs of gills. Swim bladder is absent. Sexes are separate. Gonads are paired. Fertilization is internal. They are oviparous or viviparous. It includes the sharks, dogfishes, rays, skates.

Evolutionary adaptations in class chondrichthyes: They have streamlined body for active movement. They have tough skin, placoid scales and strong jaws for predatory life. They have well developed sensory system.

Class Osteichthyes (Bony fishes)
General characteristics of class osteichthyes: Body is usually spindle-shaped and streamlined for active movement through water. Endoskeleton is partly or wholly bony. Vertebrae are amphicoelous. Pelvic girdle is often absent. Notochord persists in reduced form. Skin usually contains dermal scales embedded in the dermis. Both median and paired fins are present. Pectoral and pelvic fins are paired while dorsal fin is single. The caudal fin is homocercal. Mouth is usually terminal, i.e., anterior end often bears numerous teeth. Digestive system is well developed. Anus is present and cloaca is absent. The four pairs of gills are covered by operculum. Spiracles are mostly absent. Swim bladder is usually present with or without connection with the pharynx. Circulatory system has two chambered, having only one atrium and one ventricle. Red blood cells are oval and nucleated. Brain has ten pairs of cranial nerves. Gonads are paired. Fertilization is generally external. They are oviparous. They show parental care. They include Labeo rohita, sea horse, flying fish, globe fish, catla catla, trout, codfish and eel. Latimeria, a lobe-finned fish, is a living fossil.

Evolutionary adaptations in class osteichthyes: They have streamlined body, fins for swimming. Operculum protects gills. Swim bladder provides buoyancy. Lateral line system detects vibrations.

The animals which are called tetrapods have four limbs. The lobe-finned fishes of the Devonian period are ancestral to the amphibians, the first tetrapods. Animals that live on land use limbs to support the body, as air is normally less buoyant than water. Lobed-finned fishes and early amphibians also had lungs and means to respire air.

Class Amphibia
General characteristics of class amphibia: Body varies considerably in forms, is divisible only into head and trunk. Most have two pairs of pentadactyl limbs with 4-5 or fewer digits. Some have lost legs, e.g., Caecilians. Webbed feet often present, e.g., frogs. Skin is smooth, moist and rich in glands. It is highly vascularized. Scales are generally absent. In some glands are toxic. Chromatophore pigment cells are present in the skin. In larval stage respiration takes place by gills and in the adults by lungs and skin. Heart is three chambered with respect to atria and ventricle. Sinus venosus, truncus arteriosus are present. Double circulation takes place through the heart. Sexes are separate. Gonads are paired. Fertilization may be external or internal. Most forms are oviparous. Development takes place through metamorphosis. Amphibians are anamniotes (without amnion). Body temperature is variable, i.e., poikilothermic (ectotherms) and many forms undergo hibernation in winter. The examples of amphibians are frogs, toads, salamanders, caecilian, mud puppy etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in class amphibia: Limbs for movement on solid substratum. Lungs for breathing air. Internal nares to make breathing possible by keeping mouth closed. Slimy skin for protection against desiccation. Changed in circulatory system to provide respiration by lungs and skin. There is reduction in bones to make the body lighter.

Transition from Aquatic to Land Habitat
Amphibians lie on the borderline between aquatic and true terrestrial animals. The amphibian reproduction is dependent on water so the amphibians are not a successful group owing to their dependence on water for reproduction and development.

Class Reptilia
General characteristics of class reptilia: There are two pairs of pentadactyl limbs, typically with five digits. Skin is rough, cornified and dry, which is adapted to land life. Heart is incompletely four chambered, having two atria and partly divided ventricle. Crocodiles have completely four chambered heart. Reptiles are cold blooded animals, i.e., poikilothermic (ectotherms) and hibernate in winter. Sexes are separate. Gonads are paired. Fertilization is internal. Most forms are oviparous. Eggs are large, amniotic and have large yolk eggs. Eggs are enclosed by leathery or limy shell for protection. Embryo is protected by three embryonic membranes known as amnion, allantois and chorion. The examples of reptiles are tortoise, lizard, snake, crocodile and alligator etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in class reptilia: Reptiles show the advancement over the amphibians in having: (a) A dry skin which enables them to live away from water. (b) Separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the heart. (c) A neck movable independent of the body. (d) Better mechanism of breathing. (e) Fertilization is internal. (f) Egg with shell for protection on land.

Class Aves
General characteristics of class aves: Body of aves is streamlined and adapted for flying. It is divided into head, neck, a trunk and a tail. Neck is very long and flexible. There are two pairs of pentadactyl limbs. The forelimbs are modified to form wings. Hind limbs are strong and adapted for perching, walking or swimming. Digits are armed with horny claws. The skin is covered by an epidermal horny covering of feathers all over the body and scales on the feet. Due to air cavities, skeleton is light. Skull has large sockets. Jaws extend into horny beak. Teeth are absent. Heart is four chambered, having two atria and two ventricles. There is only right aorta. It curves to the right side then bends backward. Birds are endothermic. Respiration takes place only by lungs. There are one pair of kidneys. The ureters open into the cloaca. In birds urine is semisolid and uric acid is main nitrogenous waste. Fertilization is internal. Eggs are large with much yolk. Only one ovary is functional. Some birds have secondarily lost the power of flight and are called flightless birds e.g., ostrich, kiwi, etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in class aves: An insulated covering over the body is present. Air circulation in the lungs, taking place during both inspiration and expiration. Complete separation of venous and arterial blood in the heart. A regulated body temperature keeps the aves equally active all the year round. Patterns of behaviour, such as care for the young ones, nest building, courtship and affection for the mate and migration, which are practically unknown in reptiles.

Class Mammalia
General characteristics of class mammalia: Body is variously shaped and divisible into a head, a neck, a trunk and a tail. There are two pairs of pentadactyl limbs. These are variously adapted for walking, running, burrowing and swimming or flying. Skin is glandular, mostly covered by hair. Coelom is completely divided into anterior smaller thoracic cavity and posterior larger cavity by a muscular partition the diaphragm, which is present only in the mammals. Endoskeleton is fully ossified. Skull has two occipital condyles, large cranium. External ear or pinna is present. There is a chain of three bones in the ear incus, malleus and stapes. Mammals have deciduous and permanent teeth. Heart is four chambered. Only left aortic arch is present. Red blood cells are non-nucleated. Mammals are warm blooded (endothermic) animals. Voice apparatus is well developed, and consists of larynx and epiglottis. Mammals give birth to their young ones. Mammals feed them on milk produced by mammary glands of mother.
Mammals are classified into three subclasses: (1) Prototheria-Egg laying mammals. (2) Metatheria-Pouched mammals. (3) Eutheria-Placental mammals.

Subclass Prototheria - The Monotremes
The subclass Prototheria is a connecting link between reptiles and mammals and is evidence of evolution and origin of mammals from reptiles. Certain members of this subclass have some adaptations for aquatic life, e.g., Duck bill platypus, which has a bill similar to that of duck, and has webbed toes. The mammalian feature of the monotremes is that the young are fed on mother’s milk and they feed their youngs. The reptilian features include laying of eggs, single opening for urinogenital and digestive systems called cloaca. The monotremes are found in Australia. The examples of monotremes are Duckbill platypus, spiny ant eater.

Subclass Metatheria - The Marsupials
The females have an abdominal pouch the marsupium, where they rear their young. The young one’s when borne are immature. The nipples are in the pouch. The mother feeds the young ones and carries them in the pouch till they are matured enough. The Marsupials are found in Australia and America. The examples of Marsupials are: opossum, kangaroo and Koala.

Sub-class Eutheria - The Placentals
Development of young one takes place inside the body of the mother. The young’s are bore fully developed. Developing placental mammals are dependent on placenta (an organ of exchange between maternal blood and fetal blood.) So these mammals are called placental mammals. Nutrients are supplied to the growing offspring, and wastes are passed to the mother for excretion. The young ones are born at a relatively advanced stage of development. The placental mammals have maximum mammalian characteristics. In some hair may be modified into scales in pangolin, and spines in porcupine. Examples of the placental mammals are man, whale, elephant, horse, rat, mice, bat, dolphin, cat, tiger, lion, monkey, etc.

Evolutionary adaptations in class mammalia: A regulated body temperature. This makes them independent of environmental change, keeping active throughout the year. Complete separation of blood in the heart. More efficient mechanism of respiration and circulation. An active life and a high rate of metabolism. A separate respiratory passage that avoids interference in breathing during feeding. Better developed senses of smell, sight and hearing. A more highly developed nervous system. Large cerebrum and cerebellum provide for better coordination in all activities and retentive memory. Patterns of behaviour, such as care and nursing of the young ones.