Diversity among plants

Diagnostic Features of Plants
Plants are multicellular eukaryotes with well-developed tissue and have autotrophic nutrition. Plants are well protected from being dried up in air by their cuticle, formed from a waxy substance called cutin. The plant body has root, stems and leaves having vascular tissue xylem, phloem and cellulose rich cell walls. Plants show alternation of generation. It consists of the sporophyte the diploid generation that produces haploid spores by meiosis. Spores develop into a haploid generation. The gametophyte is the haploid generation which produces gametes that unite to form a diploid zygote. The gametes are eggs and sperms.

NON-VASCULAR PLANTS
Plants are currently divided into two main groups: the nonvascular or bryophytes, and the vascular plants or tracheophytes. The nonvascular plants lack vascular tissues and do not have true roots, stems, and leaves. Therefore, the nonvascular plants have root like, stem like, and leaf like structures.

General characteristics of Bryophytes
Bryophytes are small plants, many are only 1 cm tall and a few exceed 2 cm. They are often called amphibians of plant kingdom. All bryophytes are photosynthetic and manufacture their own food. They have multicellular sex organs. Some of their sporophytes are green and prominent as compared to gametophyte. In many bryophytes the spores are not enclosed within gametophyte tissue, others are covered at maturity. The main features of bryophytes are: (1) They lack specialized vascular tissues. (2) Multicellular sex organs produce embryo. (3) Sporophytes are always smaller and obtain their food from the gametophyte. (4) Their life cycles involve alternation of the generation. (5) Bryophytes are also called amphibious plants because they need water for development, existence and reproduction.

Life Cycle of Moss
The moss plants show two generations the sporophyte and the gametophyte, which regularly alternate with each other. It is known as alternation of generation. The life cycle is completed when the plant passes through these two generations. The matured green shoot is the gametophyte. It produces gametes and reproduces by sexual union. The sex organ is at the apex of the shoot. The male sex organ is known as antheridium and the female sex organ as archegonium. The sex organs are intermixed with sterile multicellular hair like structures, known as paraphyses. The two sex organs may occur on the same plant, i.e., monoecious or on two separate plants, i.e., dioecious. The sporophyte consists of a foot which is embedded in the tissue of the gametophyte and a stalk or seta with a capsule at the tip. Spores are formed in the sporophyte by meiosis, thus the spores are haploid. The spore germinates to form an algal like structure called protonema, having bud and branches. The buds develop into gametophyte. In the mature gametophyte the archegonia and antheridia are produced.

The Land Adaptations of Bryophytes
The land adaptive characteristics exhibited by nonvascular plants are:
The multicellular plant body and conservation of water: The plant body of liverworts called thallus is very small and multicellular consists of hundreds of cells, e.g., Marchantia. Only the cells of the upper epidermis are exposed to the atmosphere. Some cells are photosynthetic cells. The second zone consists of storage cells. Water cannot enter these cells because the upper epidermal cells contain cutin, which is a wax like water resistant substance.

Pores and air chambers: The upper surface of thallus contains pores, which lead into air chambers containing photosynthetic cells. CO2 is absorbed by large amount through pores and reaches into the air chambers. From air chambers CO2 then diffuses into the photosynthetic cells. Along with CO2 being absorbed, evaporation of water may occur through the pores.

Absorption of water by rhizoids: The structures for absorption of water in moss and liverworts are rhizoids. These are present on the lower surface of the Marchantia thallus. Rhizoids are long filamentous structures. They are unicellular and are extensions of the cell of the lower epidermis. Rhizoids increase surface area for absorption of water from the soil and also help in anchorage.

Production of gametes: When two different types of gametes are produced, it is called heterogamy. Sperms and ova are produced in archegonium and antheridium respectively in terrestrial plants, e.g., Moss, Marchantia etc. The sperms are flagellated and require water for reaching egg. The egg is large and nonmotile. It contains large amount of food which is needed to nourish the early stages of the developing embryo after fertilization. Due to water requirement for fertilization they cannot live away from water.

Embryo Formation: The fertilization is inside the archegonium. The zygote divides to form the embryo which is retained inside the archegonium. The chances of survival of embryo are increased as it is protected by the wall of the archegonium. Embryo is present in all bryophytes and vascular plants.

Alternation of Generations: The mosses and liverworts have a life cycle with alternating gametophyte and sporophyte generations. It increases the chances of survival of the plants on land.

Importance of Bryophytes
Mosses play an important role in their environment. They hold the soil and prevent erosion. They provide food for animals, especially birds and wild animals. Commercially the most important mosses are the peat mosses. Their partially decomposed remains are harvested as peat and used as a soil conditioner. When added to sandy soils peat moss helps to hold and retain moisture.

SEEDLESS VASCULAR PLANTS
The vascular plants include ferns and their allies, gymnosperms and angiosperms. The vascular tissue consists of xylem and phloem. The vascular plants have true roots, stems and leaves. Xylem, with its strong walled cells, supports the body of the plant against the pull of gravity. The leaves are covered by a waxy cuticle. Leaves have small pores called stomata. The sporophyte generation is diploid and dominant in vascular plants. The vascular plants are widely distributed.
The seedless vascular plants (ferns and their allies) disperse the species by producing windblown spores. When the spores germinate, a relatively large gametophyte is formed which is independent of the sporophyte for its nutrition. In these plants, flagellated sperms are released by antheridia and swim in a film of external water to the archegonia, where fertilization occurs.
Because the seedless vascular plants are not closely related, each type is placed in its own division. The seedless vascular plants include whisk ferns (division Psilotophyta), club mosses (division Lycopodophyta), horsetails (division Equisetophyta), and ferns (division Pteridophyta).

Psilopsida—Whisk ferns
The group psilopsida includes the simplest known vascular plants known as whisk ferns, named for their resemblance to whisk brooms. The whisk fern lack true roots but bear underground stems called rhizomes that bear rhizoids. Aerial stems have no true leaves, they have only tiny scales. The stems branch repeatedly and carry on photosynthesis. Sporangia are present at the tips of the branches. Most members of this group are extinct. Example of extinct group is Rhynia. Psilotum is the most common living example.

Evolution of leaf in vascular plants
In vascular plants there are two types of leaves: (a) Single veined leaves (b) Many veined leaves. Single veined leaves are small and scale like. They have single vascular strand. Therefore they are called single or one veined leaves or microphyllous leaves e.g., club mosses (Lycopodium). Many veined leaves are large true leaves having prominent blade. As many veins and vascular bundles are present so they are called many veined leaves or megaphyllous leaves, e.g., Ginkgo etc.
There is no fossil record showing the evolution of single veined leaves. However two hypotheses have been advanced to explain their origin: (a) out-growth hypothesis (b) reduction hypothesis.
According to out-growth hypothesis single veined leaf originated as an outgrowth from the naked stem of primitive plant. The outgrowth had a single vascular strand. With increase in size, vascular tissues were developed for the transportation of food, water and support. Thus vascular strand extended from main vascular cylinder of the stem to a single veined leaf.
It is believed that the early vascular plants had naked stems with forked branches found in early vascular plants e.g., Rhynia. According to reduction hypothesis the forked branches were changed to a single plane known as planation. The branches became flat and spaces between the branches and vascular tissues became filled with photosynthetic tissues called webbing. The structure resembles superficially to the webbed foot of the duck and thus a many veined leaf evolved.

Lycopsida-Club Mosses
The plant body consists of a branching rhizome which sends up aerial stems less than 30 cm tall. Tightly packed scale like leaves cover the stem and branches of the plants. The leaves are microphylls, having only one strand of vascular tissue. In club mosses the sporangia are born on terminal clusters of leaves called strobili which are club shaped. They are only living plants to have microphylls. The familiar members of this group belong to genera Lycopodium and Selaginella.

Sphenopsida-Horsetails
Sphenopsida, commonly known as horsetails, are found in waste and wet places. This group includes more fossil plants than living one. Today there is only one genus, Equisetum.

Pteropsida-Ferns
Ferns belong to the group pteropsida, subgroup or class filicinae, which are most abundant group of seedless vascular plants in warm and moist tropical regions.
Ferns range in size from reduced aquatic forms less than a centimetre, to a tree fern that may have trunks more than 24 metres tall, with leaves up to 5 metres or more in length. Except few all the ferns are homosporous. Sporophyte generation is much larger, more conspicuous, and more complex than the gametophyte. Sporophyte is completely independent. Sporangia are foliar, i.e., attached to leaves or fronds. When the frond is young and immature, it is coiled. This pattern of development is called circinate vernation. It is an important feature of ferns.

Importance of peat bogs
Sphagnum moss often grows in wet, spongy places forming dense mats. Such places are called bogs. One of the distinctive features of this moss is a presence of large empty cells. This feature makes peat moss particularly beneficial to humans. When added to sandy soils, for example, peat moss helps to hold and retain moisture. In bogs, the dead Sphagnum accumulates and do not decay. This accumulated moss called peat is used as fuel.

Life Cycle of Fern
Life cycle of Adiantum (Maidenhair fern) contains two generations i.e., sporophyte and gametophyte. Both of these generations are independent.

Sporophyte generation
Sporophyte of Adiantum produces vegetative leaves at start. At later stages, fertile leaves also start producing along with vegetative leaves. Fertile leaves produce sori (singular: sorus) on their underside. Sori are group of sporangia. These sori are covered with a flap of tissue called false indusium.
A mature sporangium is flattened, spherical or ellipsoidal. It consists of a stalk and a rounded structure called capsule. Capsule is covered with single layered wall. Wall contains two portions: annulus and stomium. Annulus portion contains cells with thick cell walls. Stomium consists of cell with thin cell walls. This is the site for bursting of sporangium. Within sporangium, spores are produced by meiosis of spore mother cells. Many spores are produced. Spore wall contains two layers exine and intine.
At maturity, the wall of sporangia burst. Sporangium becomes dry, so annulus shrinks which exerts pressure on stomium cells. Stomium is the weak point, so sporangia get burst from this region, thus causing the dispersal of spores. After falling on suitable place, exine of spore bursts and intine elongates to produce rhizoids and protonema.

Gametophyte generation
Protonema develops into gametophyte called prothallus. It is heart shaped. It has a notch, where apical cell is present. Rhizoids develop from underside of gametophyte for anchorage and absorption. Gametophyte contains chloroplasts, so carry out photosynthesis. It is independent. Two kinds of organs archegonia and antheridia are produced on gametophyte. Archegonium is a flask like structure with two portions i.e., venter and neck. Venter contains egg and neck canal cells. Antheridia are globose structures; in which antherozoids are produced. Antherozoids when get mature have two flagella.
During sexual reproduction antherozoids after releasing from antheridia travel through water chemotactically towards archegonia. Antherozoids fertilize the egg inside archegonia. Resultant zygote develops into embryo. Embryo starts divisions to form sporophyte. Sporophyte depends upon gametophyte at start but soon it becomes independent. The life cycle of fern shows heteromorphic alternation of generation.

Importance of Seedless Vascular Plants
Lycopodium and Selaginella are chiefly grown as ornamental plants. Ducks and other water fowls feed upon the rhizome of lycopsida sp. The ferns are mostly ornamental plants of gardens and greenhouses. Some of them are used in the preparation of bouquets. Stems and leaves of tree ferns are used for building materials. Some genera are edible. Some ferns yield a drug, which is utilized for removing the intestinal-parasites. Practically all the members of the seedless vascular plants have contributed extensively to coal formation.

SEED PLANTS
The two groups of seed bearing vascular plants are the gymnosperms and angiosperms. The seeds of gymnosperm are produced exposed on the surface of the sporophylls that make up cones. The seeds of angiosperms are usually enclosed by a fruit and produced from a flower.

Evolution of Seed
Seed may be considered as a fertilized megasporangium. It has integument around it. During course of evolution seed has passed through the following stages.
Heterospory: Seed plants are heterosporous i.e., produce microspore and megaspore respectively. The megaspore grows into a female gametophyte and the microspore grows into a male gametophyte. The megaspores of the seed plants remain inside the sporangium, where the megaspore develops into a tiny female gametophyte.
Evolution of pollen tube: The evolution of pollen tube parallels the evolution of seeds. The egg produced inside the female gametophyte is very well protected in the sporangium. It is so well protected that flagellated sperm would not have the slightest chance of ever reaching an egg. This obstacle has been overcome by the development of pollen tubes. Once the pollen grain reaches the cone or flower, it germinates. The germinated pollen grain is a tiny male gametophyte. It produces a long pollen tube, which grows to the ovule and then digests its way through the protecting layers to the enclosed egg.
Evolution of Integument around the Megasporangium and Seed: In carboniferous period fern like plants were present. The sporophyte of these plants had little protective branch like outgrowths, surrounding the megasporangium. During evolution the outgrowths fused together forming integument, enclosing the megasporangium. Megaspore is retained in the megasporangium. This modified structure is called an ovule. The fertilized ovule evolved into seed because of retention of developing embryo.

Gymnosperms (naked seed plants)
The plant body of gymnosperms may be tall, woody, perennial trees or shrubs. The plant body is a sporophyte, differentiated into stem, leaves and root. The stem is branched with an exception of Cycas, which is unbranched. Gymnosperms have two types of leaves. The foliage leaves bear sporangia. Reproductive structures are usually borne in the cones on which sporophylls are spirally arranged. The leaves are of two kinds i.e., scale leaves and foliage leaves. Foliage leaves may be needle like, linear or broad. The leaves are evergreen with sunken stomata. Venation is simple. The arrangement of leaves is either spiral or cyclic. Leaves exhibit xerophytic features like thick and tough cuticle, sunken stomata, presence of wax on the surface. Xylem consists of tracheids and lacks vessels. Wood parenchyma and wood fibres are generally absent. Companion cells are also absent. Male and female sporophylls are arranged on separate cones i.e., microsporophyll and megasporophylls, i.e., produce microspores and megaspores respectively. They are heterosporous. Sporophyte and gametophytic generation are quite distinct.

Uses of gymnosperms
Pine seeds like chilghoza are eaten as dry fruits. Ephedrine, a drug from Ephedra is used for the relief of asthma and other respiratory ailments. Conifers are a source of soft wood for construction, packing, plywood, board and for making paper. Cycads are cultivated as ornamental plants, a wild cycad, serves as a source of “sago”. It is obtained as a liquid state and then solidifies to form small granules. Resins, turpentine, tar and oils are obtained from conifers.

Angiosperms (enclosed seed plants)
Angiosperms are the flowering plants. Their seeds are enclosed by fruits. The leaves bearing ovules are folded and joined at the margins to form ovaries. The ovary after fertilization is changed into fruit. This is exceptionally a large and successful group of plants which is divided into two groups dicots and monocots. They have common characters, like, vascular tissues, differentiated plant body, flowers, fruits, and seeds. The two groups may be differentiated as shown in table.

Life Cycle of a Flowering Plant
All plants show alternation of generations in the flowering plants. The sporophyte, a diploid plant, alternates with haploid inconspicuous gametophytic generation.
The anthers and carpels act as male and female parts respectively. A typical anther when fully developed contains 2 to 4 elongated sacs called pollen sacs. The pollen sacs contain pollen grains. When anther is developing, mitotic divisions produces microspore mother cells inside it. As a result of meiosis in a diploid mother cell, four haploid microspores are produced. A microspore then divides mitotically into a two celled, pollen grain. A tough wall develops around the pollen grain, which protects the contents of the pollen grain from drying out. Cells on the surface of stigma secrete a sticky nutrient fluid containing sugar and other substances. After pollination the pollen grains germinate on the stigma. Each pollen grain produces a long, thin walled pollen tube. The pollen tube grows down, through the tissues of the stigma, style and ovary until it reaches the ovule.
As the pollen tube develops, the two nuclei of the pollen grain move into it. The two nuclei are called generative nucleus and the pollen tube nucleus. Generative nucleus divides to form two somewhat elongated sperms. The tube nucleus is located near the tip of the pollen tube with two sperms following behind. The pollen tube, containing tube nucleus and the two sperms (male gametes), is the male gametophyte.
The ovule is an egg shaped structure attached by a stalk, to the inside of the ovary. Depending upon the species of the plant involved, an ovary may have one, two, several or many thousands of ovules. The ovule has an opening called micropyle. Megaspore mother cell of the ovule undergoes meiosis to produce four haploid cells. Only one of these cells survives. The surviving cell is called the megaspore which divides by mitosis three times to produce eight haploid nuclei. This structure is called embryo sac. Wall formation takes place and these nuclei are converted into cells. The cells of embryo sac are antipodal cells, polar nuclei, synergids and egg. The embryo sac having these cells are called female gametophyte. Antipodal cells are three in number and are present at the opposite end of the micropyle. They have no function and sooner or later get disorganized. Synergids are two cells present at micropylar end. These help in fertilization by guiding the pollen tube and after fertilization is over these get disorganized. Polar nuclei are two in number, present at the centre. Egg is present at micropylar end and is present between the two synergids.
When pollen tube reaches the embryo sac, the tip of the tube ruptures. One of the two sperms fuses with the egg to form a zygote. The other sperm fuses with the fusion nucleus to form a primary endosperm nucleus. This only occurs in the flowering plants.

Seeds and fruits: The development of embryo takes place in the ovule. After fertilization fusion nucleus develops into an embryonic plant, which consists of three sets of haploid chromosomes, i.e., it is triploid. The triploid nucleus divides and develops into an endosperm. It is triploid tissue. The endosperm divides, enlarges and is used as stored food for the young embryo.
After fertilization the formation of embryo and endosperm tissue takes place simultaneously. Meanwhile the ovule increases in size. The embryo consists of: (i) One or two cotyledons, (ii) epicotyl (iii) hypocotyl. Both epicotyl and hypocotyl are the parts of the rod like axis attached to the cotyledons. In some plants cotyledons digest and absorb endosperm as they mature into seed. The ovary wall enlarges and ripens to become the fruit.

Differences between dicots and monocots
Leaves: Broad, generally bifacial with reticulate venation in dicots. Long narrow, lanceolate, monofacial with parallel venation in monocots.
Stem: Vascular bundle in ring, vascular cambium is present which gives secondary growth in dicots. Vascular bundles scattered, vascular cambium usually absent so no secondary growth occurs in monocots.
Root: Primary root is a tap root which develops lateral root in dicots. Adventitious roots arise from the base of stem, and give rise to a fibrous root system in monocots.
Flowers: Typically tetra or pentamerous, calyx and corolla usually differ from each other. Flowers are usually insect pollinated in dicots. Parts usually in three i.e., trimerous. No distinction between calyx and corolla. Flowers are often air pollinated in monocots.
Examples: Rose, pea, buttercup etc in dicots. Lilies, orchids, grasses, wheat, rice in monocots.

Adaptations of angiosperms on land
Roots, stems and leaves: The vascular tissue contains vessels as well as tracheids. Leaves are broad, expanded and provided with a dense network of veins. The broad leaves are efficient in absorbing light for photosynthesis. The cuticle covering the aerial parts helps to protect the plant from drying in the terrestrial environment. Angiosperms have conquered all kinds of habitats and some have even returned to water.
Flowers: The reproductive organs are enclosed in flowers which are modified for wind and insects pollination. Fertilization takes place through pollen tube independent of external water. Double fertilization increased survival success. Following fertilization the ovules located in ovaries develop into seeds. Ovary wall is transformed into a fruit. Fruits provide protection for seeds and a mechanism for wide dispersal.

Inflorescence
Flowers are borne either single or in clusters. A flower is said to be solitary when it is borne singly, e.g., shoe flower. Flowers borne in clusters along with the stem and associated whorls constitute inflorescence. Depending upon the arrangement of flowers, inflorescence is classified into (a) Racemose (b) Cymose (c) Compound.

Racemose inflorescence: In this type the main axis of inflorescence does not end in a flower but it continues to grow and give off flowers laterally. The basal flowers are older and upper are younger. e.g., mustard.
Cymose inflorescence: In this type the main axis terminates in a flower but the lateral buds continue to grow in the same manner. The flowers are formed in basipetal succession, i.e., the basal flowers are younger and upper flowers are older, e.g., Dianthus (pink).
Compound inflorescence: In compound inflorescence the main axis of the inflorescence branches repeatedly in a racemose manner and each branch bears flowers in a racemose or cymose pattern, e.g., Cassia fistula.

Significance of Angiosperms to Humans
Angiosperms form the bulk of the food of man. Major cereals are wheat, rice, maize etc. Dry fruits are also eaten as dry fruits, e.g., groundnut, cashew nut, almonds, walnut, etc. Seeds rich in oil are called oil seeds. Oil seeds for cooking are obtained from groundnut, mustard, cotton seeds, rape seed etc. Spices include cinnamon, cloves, chillies, black pepper, cumin seeds, caraway, coriander, fennel. Tea, coffee and cocoa are important beverages obtained from flowering plants. Sugar is obtained from sugar beet and sugar cane roots. Many plants yield fodder for the cattle. Important fodder giving plants are berseem, shaftal, senji, etc.
A large number of drugs are obtained from flowering plants. Some of the drugs are morphine and codeine from opium, quinine from cinchona. Important timber yielding plants are teak, sal, oak and sisso. Commercial cork is obtained from oak. Many plants provide us fibres for various uses. Textile fibres are obtained from cotton, rough fibres for making ropes and gunny bags are obtained from flax, hemp, jute etc. Jute fibres are used to make ropes, bags, carpets, and mats etc. The husk of fruits of coconut is used for making coir, brooms and duster etc. A large number of flowering plants are grown in gardens and houses as ornamental plants. Common among them are roses, pansies, petunias, etc.