Protists and Fungi

PROTISTS: THE EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIP
Vast assortment of living forms, variations in size, shape, methods of reproduction, modes of nutrition, and life styles make it difficult for taxonomists to assign protists to a single kingdom. That is why the members of this kingdom do not have a common ancestor.

Polyphyletic Origin of Protists
Kingdom Protista is a polyphyletic group of organisms; that is, protists do not share a common ancestor. This hypothesis is based upon the variations exhibited by them in cell structure, ways of obtaining nutrients, mode of life, habitat, methods of reproduction and means of locomotion.

Variations exhibited by protists
The protists show variations in size, methods of obtaining nutrients, mode of life, and locomotion.
Size: The size varies considerably within the protist kingdom, from microscopic protozoa to giant kelps, which are brown algae that can reach 75 metres in length.
Although most protists are unicellular, some have a colonial organization (a colony is a loose aggregation of cells), some are coenocytic (multinucleate but not multicellular), and some are multicellular. Unlike fungi, plants and animals, multicellular protists have relatively simple body forms without specialized tissues.
Methods of obtaining nutrients: These differ widely in kingdom protista. The autotrophic protists, e.g., the algae have chlorophyll and photosynthesize as plants do. Some of the heterotrophic protists, e.g., the water molds, obtain their food by absorption as fungi do. Other heterotrophs, i.e., the protozoa and slime molds resemble animals i.e., they ingest food derived from the bodies of other organisms.
Mode of life: It shows that many protists are free living while others form symbiotic association with different organisms. These associations range from mutualism, a more or less equal partnership in which both organisms benefit, to parasitism in which one organism lives on or inside another and is metabolically dependent on it. Most protists are aquatic and live in oceans or freshwater. They make up a part of the plankton.
Reproduction: Reproduction is quite varied in the kingdom protists. All protists reproduce asexually and many reproduce sexually with both meiosis and syngamy (the union of gametes). Sexual protists do not develop multicellular sex organs, nor do they form embryos.
Locomotion: Many protists are motile at some stage of their life cycle and have various means of locomotion. It may be accomplished by amoeboid motion, i.e., by extensions of pseudopodia, or by cilia or flagella. Many protists use a combination of flagellar and amoeboid motion.

CATEGORIES OF PROTISTS
Protozoa: The Animal Like Protists
Protozoa comes from the Latin word meaning ‘first animals’. This form protozoa is used today to designate an informal group of animal like protists. Protozoa ingest food, lack cell wall and have centrioles. Body of the protozoa is of a typical eukaryotic cell and consists of one cell containing all the structures necessary to perform the functions of life. Protozoa have organelles called vacuoles to perform special function. The food vacuoles when they are fused with lysosomes. Freshwater protozoans have contractile vacuoles for the elimination of water. Reproduction takes place by asexual and sexual. The organs of locomotion are pseudopodia, e.g., Amoeba, Cilia, e.g., Paramecium, Flagella, e.g., Trypanosoma, the parasitic protozoans do not have any specific means of locomotion, e.g., Plasmodium (malarial parasite). Regeneration is common in protozoans. Protozoans form resistant cyst to overcome unfavourable conditions. The protozoans have been excluded from kingdom animalia due to their unicellular cell structure as rest of the animals are multicellular.

Based upon means of locomotions, the protozoans are further classified into sarcodina, mastigophora, ciliophora and sporozoa.

Sarcodina: These protozoans have cytoplasmic extensions i.e., pseudopodia as their locomotory structures. The sarcodines are mostly aquatic. Some of them are found in freshwater and have no shell, e.g., Amoeba proteus (free living) and Entamoeba histolytica (causes amoebic dysentery in human). While other are found in marine water and have shell either made up of calcium carbonate (e.g., Foraminifera) or of silica (e.g., Actinopods).

Zooflagellates: Protozoans that move by means of flagella are called zooflagellates. Trypanosoma is a human parasitic zooflagellate causes sleeping sickness. Choanoflagellate is marine or freshwater zooflagellate. It is sessile and remains attached by a stalk. Flagellum is surrounded by a delicate collar which resembles the collar cell of sponges.

Ciliophora: These protozoans have hair like extensions called cilia and have two types of nuclei. Ciliates differ from the other protozoans in having two types of nuclei, many small diploid micronuclei that function in sexual process and a single large polyploid macronucleus that controls cell metabolism and growth. (e.g., Paramecium).

Sporozoa/Apicomplexans: These are parasitic protozoans. They lack locomotory structures for locomotion but can move by flexing of body wall (undulating movement). At some stage of their lives, they develop a spore, a small infective agent transmitted to the next host. Many apicomplexans complete their lifecycle in two hosts. (e.g., Plasmodium (malarial parasite).

Algae: The Plant like Protists
Algae (singular: alga) are found in freshwater ponds, lakes, streams, growing on the trunks of trees and in the sea. The body of algae may be unicellular, filamentous, colonial or multicellular. The multicellular algae may have a structure that is branched or leaf like but lacks the vascular tissues and roots, stems and leaves. The body of multicellular algae is called thallus. The photosynthetic pigments found in algae are green chlorophylls (e.g., red algae), xanthophyll and red phycoerythrin. The reserve food material is starch and stored in all groups of algae. Algal cell wall is made up of cellulose.

Types of algae: On the basis of pigments, storage products and cell wall composition, algae are classified into many groups. Some of them are following:

Euglenoids: The euglenoids are small unicellular freshwater organisms that do not have cell wall unlike other groups of algae similarly some of them are colorless and heterotrophs. Euglenoids have chlorophyll (a and b) and carotenoids. (e.g., Euglena).

Dinoflagellates: Most dinoflagellates are unicellular. Their cells are often covered with shells of interlocking cellulose plates deposited with silicates. Some dinoflagellates are known to have occasional population explosions or blooms. These blooms may colour the water orange, red or brown and are known as red tide. This is because of the presence of a carcinogenic compound, called saxitoxin. Dinoflagellates have chlorophyll (a and c) and carotenoids.

Diatoms: They are microscopic unicellular algae in the oceans. This makes diatoms very important as producers. Diatoms store energy in the form of oil. Diatoms have silica in their cell walls.

Brown Algae: Brown algae range from small forms with simple filaments to large multicellular algae. Some of the large brown algae, called kelps are tough and leathery, forms up to 75 metres in length, live in cooler marine water. The large brown kelps are leaflike in appearance. They possess leaflike blades, stemlike stipes and rootlike anchoring holdfasts. Brown algae also have chlorophyll (a and c) and carotenoids.

Red Algae: They are mostly multicellular, present chiefly in warmer seawater growing in both shallow and deep waters. They can be up to a metre long attached to rocks or other substances by a basal holdfast. Red algae also have chlorophyll a and phycobilins.

Green Algae: Green algae generally live in the ocean but are more likely found in freshwater and can even be found on land. Green algae have pigments (Chlorophyll a, b and carotenoid), energy storage products (starch) and cell wall composition (large part cellulose) similar to those of plants. Because of these and other features, it is generally accepted that plants and green algae share a common ancestry and monophyletic lineage (e.g., Chlamydomonas, Spirogyra, Volvox).

Myxomycota and Oomycota: Fungi Like Protists
The organisms of this category generally resemble with fungi in that they are non photosynthetic, heterotrophs and have bodies formed of thread like structures called hyphae. But these are not true fungi due to several reasons. Majority of them have centrioles. The cell wall is made up of cellulose unlike fungi. Therefore, they have been excluded from kingdom fungi. Two major groups of fungi like protists are Myxomycotes and Oomycotes or water molds.

Slime molds: Slime molds are organisms that are fungus like in one phase of their life cycle and amoeba like in another phase of their life cycle. Slime molds are similar in some respects to fungi i.e., body is filamentous, saprotroph, and having nonmotile spores. Slime molds differ from fungi due to presence of motility in the life cycle.
The body of slime molds is called plasmodium. It is a diploid multinucleated, cytoplasmic mass enveloped by slime sheath and is formed by the formation of zygote. The plasmodium can grow to 30 cm in diameter. They are found on damp, decaying logs and leaf litter. As the plasmodium creeps along, it ingest bacteria, yeast, cells and spores of fungi etc. Under certain conditions, the plasmodium is converted into numerous, stalked fruiting bodies, called sporangia that produce spores. Under favourable conditions, the spores germinate and release amoeboid cells or flagellated swarm cells, eventually two of them fuse to form a diploid zygote which develops into a multinucleated plasmodium once again.

The Water Molds: The water molds include white rusts and downy mildews. Most of the members of this group are parasites. Their body is called mycelium, composed of filamentous structures called hyphae as in fungi. The hyphae are aseptate (coenocytic), i.e., without cross walls (septa). Most oomycotes live in freshwater or saltwater or in soil. Asexual reproduction takes place by zoospores, which are motile and have two flagella. Zoospores are produced in sac like structure, the zoosporangium. For sexual reproduction there are two types of gametangia, female gametangium is called oogonium and the male gametangium is called antheridium. The flowing of the contents of antheridium into an oogonium leads to the individual fusion of one or more pairs of male nuclei with eggs. This produces a special kind of thick walled zygotic cell called an oospore. This structure gives the phylum its name, i.e., phylum oomycota, e.g., Phytophthora infestans.

IMPORTANCE OF PROTISTS TO HUMANS
A number of diseases in man are caused by protozoans such as, sleeping sickness, malaria and amoebic dysentery, which have already been discussed. Phytophthora infestans causes late blight in potatoes.

Ecological role of protists
The dinoflagellates and green algae are important sources of food and oxygen in freshwater and marine ecosystem and act as major producers in aquatic ecosystem. Some red algae incorporates calcium carbonate in their cell walls from sea water and help in building coral reefs along with coral animals. Dead foraminiferans sink to the bottom of ocean where their shells form a grey mud that is gradually transformed into chalk. Plankton provides food to organisms, but it is also harvested for human use. Diatomaceous earth can be used as a filtering agent or added to paints to give them a sparkling finish.

Use of protists in genetic research and single cell protein (SCP)
The plasmodial slime mold Physarum polycephalum has been used as an experimental organism that has been used to study many fundamental biological processes including growth and differentiation, cytoplasmic streaming, and the functions of cytoskeleton. Some protists are also used to produce single cell protein (SCP).

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF FUNGI
The multicellular (except yeast), eukaryotic, absorptive heterotrophs which have cell wall made up of chitin and lack centrioles in their cells are classified as fungi. The study of fungi is called mycology. The person who studies fungi is called mycologist.

Taxonomic status of fungi (Fungi as separate kingdom)
Fungi are different from plants as: (1) Fungi have no chlorophyll (2) fungi never have flagella (3) fungi are saprotrophs. Fungi are different from animals as fungi: (i) have cell wall (ii) are absorptive heterotrophs (iii) are non-motile. So fungi can neither be placed in kingdom plantae nor in kingdom animalia. Similarly, fungi cannot be classified in kingdom Protista as fungi are not direct descendants of prokaryotes and they cannot be put into kingdom monera as fungi are eukaryotes. Fungi also show some unique characters not found in other kingdoms such as “nuclear mitosis”. Because fungi are distinct from plants, animals and other eukaryotes in many ways, so they have been classified as separate kingdom.

Habitat
Fungi grow best in moist habitats, but are found wherever organic matter is present. They survive dry conditions in some resting stage or by producing resistant spores. They can also tolerate a wide range of pH from 2-9, a wide temperature range and high osmotic pressure such as in concentrated salt/sugar solutions as in jelly, jam etc. These features also help them in their survival on land.

Cellular structure of fungi
Fungal cells are eukaryotic in nature, have chitinous cell wall and lack centrioles and flagella. If carbohydrate is stored, it is usually as glycogen and not starch. Some cells have one nucleus (monokaryotic), some have two nuclei (dikaryotic) while other have multiple nuclei (multinucleate or coenocytic). Fungal cells show a unique mitotic division, called nuclear mitosis in which spindle fibers are formed within the nuclear envelope for the distribution of chromosomes to the daughter nuclei.

Body structure of fungi
The multicellular fungi form a network of filaments called hyphae. The entire mass of hyphae collectively is called mycelium. Mycelium may be monokaryotic or dikaryotic. The mycelium formed by fusion of two hyphae is called primary mycelium and that consists of dikaryotic cells is called secondary mycelium. The cross walls of septate hyphae are perforated allowing the cytoplasm to stream from one compartment to other. Yeasts are the only unicellular non hyphal fungi. Some fungi also form large fruiting bodies (basidiocarps and ascocarps) which are actually the clusters of reproductive structures.

Locomotion in fungi
Fungi are non-motile, lack basal bodies and do not have flagella at any stage of their life. They show chemotropism i.e., growth towards a food source.

Modes of nutrition in fungi
Fungi lack chlorophyll, so they are nonphotosynthetic. Thus, mode of nutrition is heterotrophic. Based upon ways of obtaining nutrient fungi may be saprotrophs, parasites, predators or symbionts (mutualists).

Saprobic fungi: Most fungi are saprotrophs, decomposers that obtain their food directly from dead organic matter. They secrete out digestive enzymes, which digest dead organic matter and the small molecules thus produced are absorbed back into the fungus. Therefore, they are absorptive heterotrophs. Saprobic fungi anchor to the substrate by modified hyphae, the rhizoids.

Parasitic fungi: Some fungi are parasites, some are even predators, and still others are mutualists. Parasitic fungi absorb nutrients directly from the living host cytoplasm with the help of specialized hyphae called haustoria. They may be obligate or facultative. Obligate parasites can live only on their host and cannot be grown on available defined growth culture medium. Powdery mildews and most rust species are obligate parasites. Facultative parasites can live on their host as well as by themselves on artificial growth media.
Some fungi are active predators. The oyster mushroom (Pleurotus) is omnivorous. It paralyses the nematodes, penetrate them, and absorb their nutrients. It fulfills its glucose requirement by decomposing wood. Another fungus Arthrobotrys forms constricting ring, dilates and captures soil nematodes.

Symbiotic fungi: Lichen is a symbiotic relationship between a fungus (mostly an ascomycotes and a few basidiomycotes), and a green alga or a cyanobacterium. The body of lichen consists of three layers. Upper layer is thin and tough made up of closely packed fungal hyphae. The middle layer is also formed by fungal hyphae interwoven with photosynthetic cells. Bottom layer consists of loosely woven hyphae. Specialized fungal hyphae either penetrate or envelope the photosynthetic cells, transferring nutrients directly to the rest of the fungus.

Mycorrhizae are mutualistic relationships between soil fungi and the roots of most plants. The hyphae help in the direct absorption of phosphorous, zinc, copper and other nutrients from the soil into the roots. Plants whose roots are invaded by mycorrhizae grow more successfully than do plants without mycorrhizae. There are two main types of mycorrhizae in which mycelia extend far out into the soil. Endomycorrhizae penetrate only into the outer cells of plant root forming coils, swellings and minute branches and also extend out into surrounding soil. Ectomycorrhizae form a covering that is exterior to the root, and they grow between cell walls. These are mostly formed with pines, firs etc.

Reproduction in fungi
The fungi reproduce both asexually and sexually.

Asexual reproduction: It takes place by sporangiospore, conidiospore, budding and fragmentation.
Sporangiospores are produced in spherical sac like structures, the sporangia which develop at the tip of special erectly growing hyphae, the sporangiophores e.g., Rhizopus.
Conidiospores are produced in the form of a cluster of chains at the tip of erectly growing hyphae, the conidiophores e.g., Penicillium.
Budding is a process in which first, nucleus is divided into two daughter nuclei by nuclear division, then a small outgrowth is formed which takes one of the daughter nuclei and subsequently gets separated from the parent cell. Fragmentation is the breakdown of mycelium into different fragments which again regenerate into new mycelium.

Sexual reproduction: Life cycle for fungi. Fungi alternate between sexual and asexual reproductive stages. The mechanism of sexual reproduction vary in different groups of fungi but plasmogamy, karyogamy and meiosis are common to all. In sexual reproduction, hyphae of two different mating types fuse and undergo nuclear fusion (karyogamy). In two of the three main groups of fungi, there is a delay between plasmogamy and karyogamy. For a long period, hyphae with genetically different nuclei of two individuals may co-exist in the mycelium. Such a fungal hypha is called dikaryotic.

CLASSIFICATION OF FUNGI
The classification of fungi is based upon the way they produce sexual spores. Three main phyla of fungi are Zygomycota, Ascomycota and Basidiomycota.

Zygomycota (Conjugating Fungi)
The phylum zygomycota is called conjugating fungi because during sexual reproduction their hyphae are fused just like the conjugation in bacteria. They are mainly saprophytic. Hyphae are nonseptate, mycelium is well developed and haploid. Rhizoids for anchorage are found. Examples are Rhizopus and Mucor.
Asexual reproduction takes place by non-motile spores produced in sporangium. They are dispersed by wind.
Sexual reproduction takes place when haploid hyphae of two different mating types designated as plus (+) and minus (-) come in contact. The tips of these hyphae swell and are cut off from the rest of the mycelium by the formation of septa. The tip cells are now called gametangia, structures that produce gametes. The gametangia fuse and their protoplasts mix. The plus and minus nuclei pair and then fuse to form a diploid nucleus, the zygote. There is no delay between plasmogamy and karyogamy and therefore, no dikaryotic phase.
The zygote develops into a zygospore. The division or phylum name refers to the zygospore. Zygospores germinate under favourable conditions and divide by meiosis. The wall of the zygospore splits and hypha grows upward. The tip of the hypha develops into a sporangium. The sporangium contains many nuclei. The wall of the sporangium ruptures and spores are liberated. Each spore grows into a new plus or minus strain of mycelium.

Ascomycota (Sac Fungi)
Ascomycotes are the members of phylum ascomycota. It is a large group. Ascomycotes are also known as sac fungi because their sexual spores are produced in little sacs called asci. Their mycelium consist of septate hyphae. There is delay between plasmogamy and karyogamy. Therefore, both monokaryotic and dikaryotic phases are found in the life cycle.
Asexual reproduction involves production of asexual spores called conidia or conidiospores. Conidia vary in shape, size and may be multicellular. The colour of conidia is what gives the characteristic green, blue, pink or other tint to many of these fungi. In unicellular yeasts, asexual reproduction takes place by budding and fission.
Sexual reproduction takes place when two hyphae produced by the germination of haploid ascospores, grow together and their cytoplasm fused (plasmogamy). Within this common cytoplasm, haploid nuclei from the parent hyphae pair but do not fuse. New hyphae develop from the area of plasmogamy and the cells of these new hyphae are dikaryotic. The dikaryotic hyphae grow and form a fruiting body called ascocarp. A fruiting body is a cluster of many asci (singular ascus) intermixed with sterile hyphae. Within each ascus the two nuclei fuse and form a diploid nucleus, the zygote, which undergoes meiosis to form four haploid nuclei. This process is usually followed by one mitotic division of each of the four nuclei, resulting in eight haploid nuclei. Each haploid nucleus develops into an ascospore. The ascospores, are then windblown if they land on a suitable location and germinate to form a new primary mycelium of monokaryotic hyphae. The examples of sac fungi are Yeasts (Saccharomyces), Neurospora, Morels, Truffles, Penicillium.

Basidiomycota (Club-Fungi)
Basidiomycota includes edible and poisonous mushrooms, bracket fungi, puffballs and some notorious plant pathogens such as rust and smut. These fungi are commonly known as club fungi due to its characteristic club (rod) shaped reproductive structures, the basidia. These fungi also have primary and secondary septate mycelia of monokaryotic and dikaryotic hyphae respectively. There is also a delay between plasmogamy and karyogamy during sexual reproduction. Although club fungi occasionally do produce conidiospores asexually, they usually reproduce sexually.

Life cycle of a mushroom (Agaricus)
The life cycle starts by the germination of characteristic haploid sexual spores of this fungus called basidiospores. Each basidiospore has the potential to give rise to a primary mycelium that consist of monokaryotic hyphae. The mycelium of Mushrooms consists of white, branched, thread like hyphae that occur mostly below ground. When the primary mycelium encounters another monokaryotic (n) hypha of opposite mating type, the two hyphae fuse. However the two haploid nuclei do not fuse and remain separate from each other. In this way a secondary mycelium with a dikaryotic (n + n) hyphae is produced, in which each cell contains two haploid nuclei. The n + n hyphae of the secondary mycelium grow and form compact mass, called buttons, along or just beneath the mycelium. Each button grows into a fruiting body known as mushroom. A mushroom, which consists of a stalk and a cap, is called basidiocarp. The lower surface of the cap usually consists of many thin perpendicular plates called gills of the mushroom. On the surface of these gills basidia are produced where haploid nuclei of the dikaryotic cells fuse to form diploid zygote. Meiosis then takes place forming four haploid nuclei that move into projections forming basidiospore, which are released later.

IMPORTANCE OF FUNGI
Fungi are useful to people in many ways but they are also harmful to human beings. Fungi cause economic gains as well as losses. Many scientists isolate different types of fungi and grow them to make various chemicals. Fungi cause diseases. Fungi cause diseases in animals and plants. Here we will discuss use of fungi, antibiotics obtained from fungi, edible fungi, ecological role of fungi and pathological role of fungi.

Ecological impact of fungi
Fungi make important contributions to the ecological balance of our world. Like bacteria, most fungi are saprotrophs, decomposers that digest and absorb nutrients from organic wastes and dead organisms. In this way fungi help in maintaining the nutrient balance. Fungi and bacteria are the major decomposers in nature. The organic waste is removed from the environment by the activity of saprotrophic fungi and bacteria. The fungi and bacteria liberate huge amounts of CO2 in the air by decomposing dead bodies of animals and plants. This carbon dioxide is used by green plants for the synthesis of organic food during photosynthesis. Thus fungi help in recycling of materials.
Humus is an important constituent of soil and essential for the proper growth of plants. Humus is formed from the organic waste material by the activities of fungi and bacteria.
Some fungi such as lichen also contribute in bioindication of pollution, reduction of environmental pollution and ecological succession (development of an ecosystem).

Economic gains from Fungi
Fungi are used as food, in baking, brewing and medicinal industries. Yeasts, Fungi are being used in genetic research as well.
Edible fungi: There are some 200 kinds of edible mushrooms e.g., Agaricus campestris, Agaricus bisporus etc. Some edible mushrooms are cultivated commercially. Truffles and morels produce underground fruiting bodies are also eaten. Aspergillus sp is used to produce soy sauce and soya paste from soya bean.
Role of fungi in baking: Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is used in baking of bread. Yeast causes fermentation of sugar resulting in production of carbon dioxide gas. When making bread, the dough rises because of this gas.
Role of fungi in brewing: The process of making alcohol by fermentation is called brewing. Different species of Saccharomyces (Yeast) are used in this process.
Role of fungi in genetic research: Yeasts are used in the biological research, especially in genetic research. Researchers use Saccharomyces cerevisiae to study molecular genetics, because its cells are easy to grow and manipulate. Pink bread mold (Neurospora) has also been used for genetic research. Yeast was one of the first eukaryotes to be used in genetic engineering. In 1983, a functional artificial chromosome was made in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It was also the first eukaryotes whose genome sequence was completely studied in 1996.
Role of fungi in medicinal industry: The first antibiotic discovered was penicillin, made by the mold Penicillium notatum. Cyclosporine obtained from soil fungus is used in organ transplantation for preventing rejection. Griseofulvin obtained from Penicillium sp is used to inhibit fungal growth.

Economic losses due to fungi
Fungi are responsible for many important diseases in plants and also in animals including man.
Plant diseases: Fungi are responsible for many serious plant diseases, including epidemics that often result in complete crop failure. All plants are susceptible to one or more kinds of fungal infection.
Some important plant diseases caused by ascomycotes are powdery mildews, chestnut blight, Dutch elm disease, apple scab, and brown rot, which attack cherries, peaches, plums, and apricots. Diseases caused by basidiomycotes include smuts and rusts that attack various plants for example the cereal crops of corn, wheat, oats etc.

Role of fungi in human diseases
Some fungi cause superficial infections in which only the skin, hair, or nails are infected. Ringworm and athlete's foot are examples of fungal infection of the skin. Candidiasis is a yeast infection of mucous membrane of the mouth or vagina caused by Candida sp.
Histoplasmosis is a serious infection of the lungs caused by inhaling spores of a soil fungus.
Ergotism is caused by purple ergot rye. It causes nervous spasm, convulsion, psychotic delusion and even gangrene.