BIOTECHNOLOGY
BIOTECHNOLOGY — 3

Since Mendel’s work was rediscovered in 1900, geneticists have made startling
advances which have led to a new era of DNA technology. Modern techniques enable
genes to be removed from one organism and inserted into another in order to produce a
desired substance, for example insulin. Not very long ago, people with insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus received the insulin they needed for survival from dead animals. Today,
they receive human insulin, a product of biotechnology. Since the 1980s, biotechnology
has produced drugs and vaccines to curb human illnesses.

Genetically engineered bacteria have been used to clean up environmental
pollution, increase the fertility of the soil, and kill insect pests. Biotechnology also
extends to multicellular organisms. It is now possible to alter the genotype and
thereby the phenotype of plants and animals. Indeed, gene therapy in humans,
to repair a faulty gene is already undergoing clinical trials. There are those
opposed to manipulation of genes for any reason. Although there have been no
major tests as yet, they fear the possibility of health and ecological repercussions in the
future.

CLONING OF A GENE

Cloning of a gene produces many identical copies. Recombinant DNA
technology is used when a very large quantity of a gene is required. The use of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) creates a lesser number of copies within a laboratory.

Recombinant DNA Technology

Recombinant DNA technology, popularly known as genetic engineering, aims at
synthesizing recombinant DNA which contains DNA from two different sources. In order
to produce recombinant DNA, the following are required:

The gene of interest, which is to be cloned.

Special molecular scissors to cut out the gene of interest.

Some molecular carrier or vector, on which the gene of interest could be placed.

A suitable host along with the vector is then introduced into an expression host
wherein a specific product is made.

How to get a gene?
There are three possible ways to get the gene of interest:
(a) to isolate it from the chromosome,
(b) to synthesize it chemically, and
(c) to make it from mRNA.

Genes can be isolated from the chromosomes by cutting the chromosomes at the
flanking sites of the gene using special enzymes known as restriction endonucleases.
If, however, the genes are small, they can also be synthesized in the laboratory. Another
very common method of getting the gene is to synthesize it in the laboratory from
messenger RNA, using reverse transcriptase. This DNA molecule is called
complementary DNA (cDNA).

Molecular Scissors: Restriction Endonucleases
These are natural enzymes of bacteria, which they use for their own protection
against viruses. The restriction enzyme cuts down the viral DNA, but does no harm to the
bacterial chromosome. They are called restriction enzymes because they restrict the
growth of viruses. In 1970, Hamilton O. Smith, at Johns Hopkins University, isolated the
first restriction enzyme. Bacteria produce a variety of such restriction enzymes, which cut
the DNA at very specific sites characterized by specific sequences of four or six
nucleotides arranged symmetrically in the reverse order. Such sequences are known as
palindromic sequences. So far more than 400 such enzymes have been isolated out of
which about 20 are frequently used in recombinant DNA technology.

EcoR1, a commonly used restriction enzyme, cuts double-stranded DNA when it
has this sequence of bases at the cleavage site. Notice there is now a gap into
which a piece of foreign DNA can be placed, if it ends in bases complementary to those
exposed by the restriction enzyme. The single stranded but complementary ends of the
two DNA molecules are called “sticky ends” because they can bind by complementary
base pairing. They, therefore, facilitate the insertion of foreign DNA into vector DNA.

Molecular Carrier: Vector

To make recombinant DNA, one often begins by selecting a vector, the means by
which recombinant DNA is introduced into a host cell. One common type of vector is a
plasmid. Plasmids were discovered by investigators studying the sex life of the intestinal
bacterium Escherichia coli.

Plasmids are natural extra-chromosomal circular DNA molecules which carry
genes for antibiotic resistance and fertility etc. One of the plasmids discovered earlier
(pSC101) has an antibiotic resistance gene for tetracycline, whereas pBR322 has
antibiotic resistance genes for tetracycline as well as ampicillin.

Inserting gene of interest in plasmid
For preparation of recombinant DNA, the plasmid is cut with the same enzyme which was used
for isolation of the gene of interest. The gene of interest (for example, insulin) is then joined
to the plasmid when joined with the sticky ends produced after cutting the plasmid with
the help of another special enzyme known as DNA ligase. This enzyme seals the foreign piece of DNA
into the vector. Now the two different DNAs have been joined and recombinant DNA is formed.

When bacteria are grown, clones are produced which have identical recombinant plasmids.
Recombinant DNA taken up by host cells results in cloning of gene and production of the
desired product.

Recombinant plasmid uptake and cloning
Bacterial cells take up recombinant plasmid, especially if they are treated with calcium chloride to make them
more permeable. Thereafter, as the cell reproduces, a bacterial clone forms and each new
cell contains at least one plasmid. Therefore, each of the bacteria contains the gene of
interest, which will express itself and make a product. From this bacterial clone, the
cloned gene can be isolated for further analysis, or the protein product can be separated.
Besides plasmids, the DNA of bacterial viruses (for example, lambda phage)
can also be used as a vector. After lambda phage attaches to a host bacterium,
recombinant DNA is released from the virus and enters the bacterium. Here, it will direct
the reproduction of many more viruses. Each virus in a bacteriophage clone contains a
copy of the gene being cloned.

Genomic Library

A genome is a full set of genes of an individual. A genomic library is a collection
of bacterial or bacteriophage clones, each clone containing a particular segment of DNA
from the source cell. For making a genomic library, an organism’s DNA is simply sliced
up into pieces, and pieces are put into vectors (i.e. plasmids or viruses) that are taken up
by host bacteria. The entire collection of bacterial or bacteriophage
clones that result contains all the genes of that organism.

A particular probe can be used to search a genomic library. A probe is a single stranded nucleotide sequence that will bind (hybridize) with a complementary
piece of DNA. Location of the probe is possible because the probe is made
fluorescent. Bacterial cells, each carrying a particular DNA clone, can be grown on
agar in a petri dish. After the probe hybridizes, the gene clone can be
isolated from the fragment. Now the DNA segment can be purified
or even analyzed for its particular DNA sequence.

Identification of a cloned gene. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).

The Polymerase Chain Reaction
Kary B. Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 1983. Earlier
methods of obtaining multiple copies of a specific sequence of DNA were time
consuming and expensive. In contrast, PCR can create millions of copies of a single gene
or of any specific piece of DNA quickly in a test tube. PCR is very specific — the targeted
sequence can be less than one part in a million of the total DNA sample. This
means even a small gene or smaller piece of DNA, among all the human genes can be
amplified using PCR.

The name PCR comes from DNA polymerase, the enzyme that carries out DNA
replication in a cell. It is considered a chain reaction because DNA polymerase will carry
out replication over and over again, until there are millions of copies of the desired DNA.
PCR can replace cloning, which is still used whenever a large quantity of gene
product is needed.

Before carrying out PCR, primers — sequences of about 20 bases that are
complementary to the bases on either side of the “target DNA” — must be available.
The primers are needed because DNA polymerase does not start the replication process;
it only continues or extends the process. After the primers bind by complementary base
pairing to the DNA strand, DNA polymerase copies the target DNA.

DNA polymerase used is a temperature-insensitive (thermostable) enzyme
extracted from the bacterium Thermus aquaticus, which lives in hot springs. Commonly,
this enzyme is also known as Taq polymerase. It can withstand high temperature, which
is used to separate double stranded DNA; therefore, replication need not be interrupted by
the need to add more enzyme. PCR is done these days in an automatic PCR machine or
thermocycler, which is a routine piece of equipment in any laboratory.

Analyzing DNA
The entire genome of an individual can be subjected to DNA fingerprinting, a
process described below. The genome is treated with restriction enzymes, which
results in a unique collection of different sized fragments. Therefore, restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLPs) exists between individuals. During a process called gel
electrophoresis, the fragments can be separated according to their lengths (molecular
weight or size), and the result is a number of bands that are so close together that they
appear as a smear. However, the use of probes for genetic markers produces a distinctive
pattern that can be recorded on X-ray film.

Recombinant DNA technology and the polymerase
chain reaction are two ways to clone a gene.

DNA fingerprinting. Three samples of DNA were cut with a restriction
enzyme and run on agarose gel. The fragments are then transferred to a membrane and the DNA was denatured. The denatured DNA on the membrane was hybridized with a radioactive
probe. Since the radioactive probes had complementary arrangements of bases to the original
DNA, all labelled fragments appeared as dark bands.

The DNA from a single sperm is enough to identify a suspected rapist. Since
DNA is inherited, its fingerprint resembles that of one’s parents. DNA fingerprinting
successfully identified the remains of a teenager who had been murdered eight years
before because the skeletal DNA was similar to that of the parent’s DNA.

In Fig. 23.7 are given some DNA fingerprints. Figure 23.7 (a) shows
comparison of a child’s fingerprint with that of his parents. The child has received DNA
from both of his parents. Arrows indicate that some bands in him are like his father, some
like his mother. Some bands are, however, unique to him, which do not match with any
of the parents.

Fig. 23.7 (b) shows a case of disputed parenthood. Two persons F1 and F2 claim
to be the father of child C, whose mother’s fingerprint is given under M. The child has
received DNA from both of his parents. Obviously F1 is not the real father.

The arrows on the left side show common bands between mother and child while
those on the right side show common bands between the father and the child.
The rightmost shows DNA fingerprints which have been presented as forensic
evidence. In a case at a deserted place, an assaulted woman scratched the attacker’s
face in her defence but he murdered her and ran away. Forensic scientists recovered murderer’s hair
and skin cells from underneath her nails. They prepared DNA fingerprints from blood of
the victim, from murderer’s skin and hair, and from three suspects’ blood. Can you compare
them for specific DNA sequence and tell who is guilty and who is not? The suspect 1
has fingerprints which are similar to fingerprint from skin cells taken from underneath
the nails of the victim. Therefore suspect 1 is the culprit. The suspects 2 and 3 are not.

PCR amplification and analysis can be used (1) to diagnose viral infections,
genetic disorders, and cancer; (2) in forensic laboratories to identify criminals; and (3) to
determine the evolutionary history of human populations. It has been possible to sequence
DNA taken from a 76,000 years old mummified human brain and from a 17 to 20 million
years old plant fossil following PCR amplification.

Gene Sequencing
In the late 1970s, methods were developed that allowed the nucleotide sequence
of any purified DNA fragment to be determined simply and quickly. The main principle
of these methods is:

To generate pieces of DNA of different sizes all starting from the same point and
ending at different points.

Separation of these different pieces of DNA on agarose gel.

Reading of sequence from the gel.

For generation of different sized DNA fragments, two methods are generally
used. One is Sanger’s method in which dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates are used to
terminate DNA synthesis at different sites. The other method is known as Maxam-Gilbert
method in which DNA threads are chemically cut into pieces of different sizes.

Sequence information is now so large that powerful computers must be used to store
and analyze it. DNA sequencing is now completely automated; robotic devices mix
the reagents and then load, run and read the
order of the nucleotide bases from the gel.
This is facilitated by using chain-
terminating nucleotides that are each
labelled with a different colored fluorescent
dye; in this case, all four synthesis reactions
can be performed in the same tube, and the
products can be separated in a single lane of
the gel. A detector positioned near the bottom
of the gel reads and records the color of
the fluorescent label on each band as it passes
through a laser beam. A computer then reads and stores this nucleotide sequence.

Owing to the automation of DNA sequencing, the genomes of many organisms
have been sequenced. These include plant chloroplasts and animal mitochondria, a
large number of bacteria, many of the yeasts, a nematode worm, Drosophila, the model plant
Arabidopsis, the mouse and human. Researchers have also deduced the complete DNA
sequence of a variety of human pathogens.

THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

The Human Genome Project is a massive effort originally funded by the U.S.
government and now increasingly by U.S. pharmaceutical companies to map the human
chromosomes. Many non-profit and for-profit biochemical laboratories around
the world are now involved in the project which has two primary goals.

The first goal is to construct a genetic map of the human genome. The aim is
to show the sequence of genes along the length of each type of chromosome,
such as depicted for the X chromosome. When the DNA sequence of
human chromosome no. 22, one of the smallest human chromosomes, was
completed in 1999, it became possible for the first time to see exactly how
genes are arranged along an entire vertebrate chromosome. With the
publication of the entire human genome in 2001, the genetic landscape
of all human chromosomes suddenly came into sharp focus. The sheer
quantity of information provided by the Human Genome Project is unprecedented
in biology. The human genome is larger than any other genome sequenced so far.

The map for each chromosome is presently incomplete, and in many instances
scientists rely on the placement of RFLPs. These sites eventually allow scientists to
map disease-causing genes because a particular RFLP and a defective gene are often
in close proximity together. For example it is known that persons with Huntington disease have a
unique site where a restriction enzyme cuts DNA. The test for Huntington disease relies
on difference from the normal.

The second goal is to construct a base sequence map. There are three billion base
pairs in the human genome and it was estimated it could take an encyclopedia of 21
volumes each with 1000 pages, to list all of these. Yet this goal has been reached and all
the chromosomes have been sequenced.

The methodology thus far has been to first chop up the genome into small pieces,
each just 1000 to 2000 base pairs long. PCR instruments copy the pieces many times, and
then an automatic DNA sequencer determines the order of the base pairs. A computer
programme later strings the sequenced pieces together in the correct order by looking for
base sequence overlaps between them. Instrumentation has gradually improved, and
recently one scientist, J. Craig Venter, founded a company by the name “Celera”
which has now sequenced the entire genome.

Knowing the base sequence of normal genes may make it possible one day to
treat certain human ills by administering normal genes and/or their protein products to
those who suffer from a genetic disease.

BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS

Today bacteria, plants and animals are genetically engineered to produce
biotechnology products. Organisms that have a foreign gene inserted into them are called
transgenic organisms.

Transgenic Bacteria

Recombinant DNA technology is used to produce bacteria that reproduce in large
vats called bioreactors. If the foreign gene is replicated and actively expressed, a large
amount of protein product can be obtained. Biotechnology products produced by bacteria,
such as insulin, human growth hormone, tissue plasminogen activator, haemophilia factor
VIII, and hepatitis B vaccine are now in the market.

Transgenic bacteria have been produced to promote health of plants; for example,
bacteria that normally live on plants and encourage the formation of ice crystals have
been changed from frost-plus to frost-minus bacteria. Also, a bacterium that normally
colonizes the roots of corn plants has now been endowed with genes (from another
bacterium) that code for an insect toxin. The toxin protects the roots from insects.

Bacteria can be selected for their ability to degrade a particular substance and then this
ability can be enhanced by genetic engineering. For instance, naturally occurring bacteria
may be engineered to do an even better job of cleaning up beaches after oil spills.

Industry has found that bacteria can be used as biofilters to prevent airborne
chemical pollutants from being vented into the air. They can also remove sulfur from coal
before it is burned and help to clean up toxic waste dumps. One such strain was given
genes that allowed it to clean up levels of toxins that would have killed other strains.

Further, these bacteria were given “suicide” genes that caused them to self-destruct when
the job had been accomplished.

Organic chemicals are often synthesized by having catalysts act on precursor
molecules or by using bacteria to carry out the synthesis. Today, it is possible to go one
step further and to manipulate the genes that code for these enzymes. For instance,
biochemists discovered a strain of bacteria that is specially good at producing
phenylalanine; an organic chemical needed to make aspartame, the dipeptide sweetener
better known as Nutrasweet. They isolated, altered and selected for the
appropriate genes so that various bacteria could be genetically engineered to produce
phenylalanine. Many major mining companies already use bacteria to obtain various
metals. Genetic engineering may enhance the ability of bacteria to extract copper,
uranium and gold from low grade sources. Some mining companies are testing
genetically engineered organisms that have improved bioleaching capabilities.

Transgenic Plants

Techniques have been developed to introduce foreign genes into immature plant
embryos, or into plant cells that have had the cell wall removed and are called
protoplasts. It is possible to treat protoplasts with an electric current while they are
suspended in a liquid containing foreign DNA. The electric current makes tiny, self-
sealing holes in the plasma membrane through which genetic material can enter. Then a
protoplast will develop into a complete plant. Foreign genes transferred to cotton, corn
and potato strains have made these plants resistant to pests because their cells now
produce an insect toxin. Similarly, soybeans have been made resistant to a common
herbicide. Some corn and cotton plants are both pest and herbicide resistant. In 1999
these transgenic crops were planted on more than 70 million acres worldwide and the
acreage was expected to triple in about five years. Improvements still to come are
increased protein or starch content and modified oil or amino acid composition.

Agribusiness companies also are in the process of developing transgenic versions
of wheat and rice in addition to corn. This is considered an absolute necessity if the 2020
global demand for rice, wheat and corn is to be met. World grain harvests have continued
to rise since the 1960s when special high-yield hybrid plants were developed during the
Green Revolution. But the per capita production has now flattened out because of
continued population growth. The hope is that genetic engineering will allow farmers to
surpass the yield barrier. Perhaps, the stomata, the pore-like openings in the leaves, could
be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water loss. Another possible goal is
to increase the efficiency of the enzyme Rubisco which captures CO₂ in most plants. A
team of Japanese scientists are attempting to introduce the C4 cycle into rice. Plants
that utilize the C4 cycle avoid the inefficiency of carboxylase by using a different means
of capturing CO₂. Unlike the single gene transfers that have been done so far, these
modifications would require a thorough re-engineering of plant cells. Single gene
transfers will cause plants to produce various products. A weed called mouse-ear cress
has been engineered to produce a biodegradable plastic (polyhydroxy-butyrate) in cell
granules. Plants are being engineered to produce human hormones, clotting factors, and
antibodies in their seeds. One type of antibody made by corn can deliver radioisotopes to
tumor cells, and another made by soybeans can be used as treatment for genital herpes. Plant-
made antibodies are inexpensive and there is little worry about contamination with
human pathogens.

Methods have been developed to insert genes into the eggs of animals. It is
tedious to insert genes into eggs by hand, but another method uses vortex
agitation in an agitator with DNA and silicon-carbide needles, creating holes
through which the DNA can enter. When these eggs are
fertilized, the resulting offspring are transgenic animals. Using this technique many types
of animal eggs have taken up the gene for bovine growth hormone. The procedure has
been used to produce larger fishes, cows, pigs, rabbits and sheep. Genetically engineered
fishes are now being kept in ponds that offer no escape to the wild because there is much
concern that they will upset or destroy natural ecosystems.

Gene pharming, the use of animal transgenic farm animals to produce
pharmaceuticals, is being pursued by a number of firms. Genes that code for
therapeutic and diagnostic proteins are incorporated into the animal’s DNA,
and the proteins appear in the animal’s milk. There are plans to produce drugs
for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, cancer, blood diseases and other
disorders. Antithrombin III, for preventing blood clot during surgery,
is currently being produced by a herd of goats, and clinical trials have begun.

Figure outlines the procedure of producing transgenic mammals.
DNA containing the gene of interest is injected into donor eggs. Following in
vitro fertilization, the zygotes are placed in host females where they
develop. After female offspring mature, the product is secreted in the milk.

Scientists of United States Department of Agriculture have been able to genetically engineer mice to produce human growth
hormone in their urine instead of in milk. They expect to be able to use the same
technique on larger animals. Urine is a preferable vehicle for a biotechnology product
than milk because all animals in a herd urinate — only females produce milk; animals start
to urinate at birth — females don’t produce milk until maturity; and it’s easier to extract
proteins from urine than from milk.

Cloning of Transgenic Animals
Imagine that an animal has been genetically engineered to produce a
biotechnology product. What would be the best possible method of getting identical
copies of the animals? Asexual reproduction through cloning the animal would be the
preferred procedure to use. Cloning is a form of asexual reproduction because it requires
only the genes of that one animal. For many years it was believed that adult vertebrate
animals could not be cloned. Although each cell contains a copy of all the genes, certain
genes are turned off in mature specialized cells. Different genes are expressed in muscle
cells, which contract, compared to nerve cells, which conduct nerve impulses and to
glandular cells, which secrete. Cloning of an adult vertebrate requires that all genes of an
adult cell be turned on again if development is to proceed normally. It had long been
thought this would be impossible. In 1997, scientists at the Roslin Institute in Scotland
announced that they achieved this feat and had produced a cloned sheep called Dolly.
Since then calves and goats have been cloned. After enucleated
eggs have been injected with 2n nuclei of adult cells, they can be coaxed to begin
development. The offspring have the genotype and phenotype of the adult that donated
the nuclei; therefore, the adult has been cloned. In the procedure that produced cloned
mice, the 2n nuclei were taken from cumulus cells. Cumulus cells are those that cling to
an egg after ovulation occurs. A specially prepared chemical bath was used to stimulate
the eggs to divide and begin development. Now that scientists have a method to clone
mammals, this procedure will undoubtedly be used routinely. In the United States, a
presidential order prohibits the cloning of humans. But certain other countries are
experimenting with the possibility.

Gene therapy is the insertion of genetic material into human cells for the
treatment of a disorder. It includes procedures that give a patient healthy genes to make
up for faulty genes and also includes the use of genes to treat various other human
illnesses such as cardiovascular diseases.

Common methods used for gene therapy are Ex-vivo and In-vivo. Ex-vivo
gene therapy is shown in which children with severe combined
immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID) are treated. These children lack an enzyme adenosine
deaminase (ADA) that is involved in the maturation of T and B cells and, therefore, they
are susceptible to life-threatening infections. Bone marrow stem cells are removed from the
patient, infected with a retrovirus (RNA virus) that carries a normal gene for the
enzyme and returned to the patient. Bone marrow stem cells are preferred
for this procedure, because they divide to produce more cells with the same genes.
Patients who have undergone this procedure do have a significant improvement in their immune
function that is associated with a sustained rise in the level of ADA enzyme activity in
the blood.

Among the many gene therapy trials, one is for familial hypercholesterolemia, a condition that develops when there is defect in
removing cholesterol from the blood. The high levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
make the patient subject to fatal heart attacks at a young age. In a recent trial,
a small portion of the liver is surgically excised and the normal gene for the receptor
is introduced. Several patients have experienced a lowering of serum
cholesterol levels following this procedure.

Cystic fibrosis patients lack a gene that codes for chloride ion transport. Patients often die due to mucus plugging in the lungs, and an
in-vivo method of treatment is being tried. Liposomes — microscopic vesicles that
spontaneously form when lipoproteins are put into a solution — carry the
gene needed to cure cystic fibrosis. Then the solution is sprayed into the airways.

Due to limited gene transfer, this methodology has not been entirely successful yet.

Gene therapy is also being done to make patients more tolerant of chemotherapy.
In clinical trials researchers are attempting to make healthy cells more tolerant while
making cancer cells more vulnerable to it. Once the bone marrow stem cells are
modified, they can be returned to the patient to
increase the level of chemotherapy that can be tolerated.

During coronary artery angioplasty, a balloon catheter is used to open up a closed artery. Unfortunately, the artery may become
blocked again. Investigators have come up with a new procedure that uses a vector
that contains a gene for vascular endothelial growth factor. The expression of the gene,
which promotes the proliferation of blood vessels to bypass the obstructed area, has been
observed in at least one patient.

Perhaps it will be possible to use in-vivo therapy to cure hemophilia, diabetes,
Parkinson disease, or AIDS. To treat hemophilia, patients could get regular doses of cells
that contain normal clotting-factor genes or such cells could be placed in organoids,
artificial organs that can be implanted in the abdominal cavity. To cure Parkinson’s
disease, dopamine-producing cells could be grafted directly into the brain.

TISSUE CULTURE

Tissue culture is the growth of a tissue in an artificial liquid culture medium.
German botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt said in 1902 that plant cells are totipotent — each
cell has the full genetic potential of the organism — and, therefore, a single cell could
become a complete plant. But it wasn’t until 1958 that Cornell botanist F.C. Steward
grew a complete carrot plant from a tiny piece of phloem. He provided the cells with
sugars, minerals and vitamins, but he also added coconut milk. (Later it was discovered
that coconut milk contains the plant hormone cytokinin). When the cultured cells began
dividing, they produced a callus, an undifferentiated group of cells. Then the callus
differentiated into shoots and roots and developed into a complete plant.

Tissue culture techniques have by now led to micropropagation, a commercial
method of producing thousands, even millions of identical seedlings in a limited amount
of space. One favourite method to accomplish micropropagation is by meristem culture.
If the correct proportions of auxins and cytokinins are added to a liquid medium, many
new shoots will develop from a single shoot tip. When these are removed more shoots
form. Since the shoots are genetically identical the adult plants that develop from them
are called clonal plants, all having the same traits. Another advantage of meristem culture
is that meristem, unlike other portions of a plant, is virus free; therefore the plants
produced are also virus free (The presence of plant viruses weakens plants and makes
them less productive).

Since plants are totipotent, it should be possible to grow an entire plant from a
single cell. This, too, has been done. Enzymes are used to digest the cell walls of a small
piece of tissue, usually mesophyll tissue, from a leaf, and the result is naked cells without
cell walls, called protoplasts. The protoplasts regenerate a new cell wall and begin to divide.
These clumps of cells can be manipulated to produce somatic embryos. Somatic embryos
are sometimes encapsulated in a protective hydrated gel (and sometimes called artificial seeds).
They can be shipped everywhere. It is possible to produce millions of somatic embryos at once
in large tanks called bioreactors. This is done for certain vegetables like tomato, celery,
asparagus and for ornamental plants like lilies, begonias and African violets. A mature
plant develops from a somatic embryo. Plants generated from the somatic embryo
may carry occasional mutations that arise during the production process. These somaclonal variants are another way to produce new plants with desired traits.

Anther culture is a technique in which mature anthers are cultured in a medium
containing vitamins and growth regulators. The haploid microspore cells within the pollen
grains divide, producing proembryos consisting of as many as 20 to 40 cells. Pollen
grains rupture releasing haploid embryos. The experiment can reveal new genes:
a haploid plant, or a chemical agent can be added that encourages chromosome doubling.
After chromosomal doubling the resulting plants are diploid: thus useful alleles
are fixed. Anther culture is a direct way to produce plants to express recessive traits. If
the recessive alleles govern desirable traits, the plants will have those known traits.

The culturing of plant tissues has led to techniques called suspension
culture. Rapidly growing cultures are cut into small pieces and shaken in a liquid
medium so that single cells or small clumps of cells are released.
These cells will produce the same chemicals as the parent plant. Suspension
cultures of Cinchona ledgeriana, Digitalis lanata produce digitoxin. Scientists envision
that it will be possible to maintain suspension cultures in bioreactors for the
production of drugs, cosmetics and agricultural chemical tools. It will not be necessary to farm plants for the purpose of acquiring these chemicals.

Genetic Engineering of Plants

Traditionally, hybridization, i.e. the
crossing of different varieties of plants or
even species, was used to produce plants
with desirable traits. Hybridization, followed
by vegetative propagation of the main
plants, generated a large number of useful
plants with these traits. Today it is possible to
directly alter the genes of organisms.
Transgenic plants carry a foreign gene that
has been introduced into their cells so that
they have new and different traits.

Since a whole plant will grow from a
protoplast, it is necessary only to place the
foreign gene into a living protoplast. A
foreign gene isolated from any type of
organism is placed in the tissue culture
medium. High-voltage electric pulses can
then be used to create pores in the plasma
membrane so that the DNA enters. In one of
the first procedures carried out, a gene for the
production of the firefly enzyme luciferase
was inserted into tobacco protoplast and the adult plants glowed when sprayed with the substrate luciferin.

Unfortunately, the regeneration of cereal grains from protoplasts has been
difficult. Corn and wheat protoplasts produce infertile plants. As a result, other methods
are used to introduce DNA into plant cells with intact cell walls. In one technique, foreign
DNA is inserted into the plasmid of the bacterium Agrobacterium, which normally
infects plant cells. A plasmid can be used to produce recombinant DNA.
Recombinant DNA contains genes from different sources, namely those of plasmids and
the foreign genes of interest. When the bacterium infects the plant the recombinant
plasmid is introduced into the plant cells. In 1987, John C. Sanford and
Theodore M. Klein of Cornell University developed another method of introducing DNA
into a plant tissue culture callus. They constructed a device, called the particle gun, that
bombards a callus with DNA coated microscopic metal particles. Then genetically altered
somatic embryos develop into genetically modified plants. Many plants including corn and
wheat varieties have been genetically engineered by this method.

Agricultural Plants with Improved Traits
Cotton, corn, potato and soybean plants have been engineered to be resistant to
either insect predation or herbicides that are judged to be environmentally safe. Some
corn and cotton plants have been produced that are both insect and herbicide resistant. In
1999, transgenic crops were planted on more than 70 million acres worldwide and the
acreage was expected to triple in about five years. If crops are resistant to a broad-spectrum
herbicide and weeds are not then the herbicide can be used to kill the weeds. When
herbicide resistant plants were planted, weeds were easily controlled, less tillage was
needed and soil erosion was minimized.

One aim of genetic engineering is to produce crops that have improved
agricultural or food quality traits such as those listed in the table below:
(e.g., increased vitamin, sugar beets, canola, etc.)

Production of salt tolerant plants had been a dream of genetic engineers. Recently
salt—tolerant Arabidopsis has been produced. For this the scientists first identified a gene
coding for a channel protein that transports Na⁺ along with H⁺ across a vacuole
membrane. Isolating Na⁺ in a vacuole prevents it from interfering with plant
metabolism. Then, the scientists cloned the gene and used it to genetically engineer plants
that overproduce the channel protein. The modified plants thrived when watered with a
salty solution. Irrigation, even with fresh water, inevitably leads to a salinization of soil
that reduces crop yields. Today, crop production is limited by effects of salinization at
about 50% of irrigated levels. The next step to solve this problem is to produce salt-
tolerant crops. It is believed that the production not only of salt- but also drought and
cold-tolerant crops will reduce the need for added farm acreage by increasing agricultural
yields that will provide enough food for a world population that is expected to nearly
double by 2050.

Some progress has also been made to increase the food quality of crops.
Soybeans have been developed that mainly produce the monounsaturated fatty acid, oleic
acid, a change that may improve human health. These altered plants also produce
vernolic acid and ricinoleic acid derivatives of oleic acid that can be used as substitutes in
paints and plastics. The necessary genes were derived from Vernonia and castor-bean
seeds and were transferred into the soybean genomes.

Genetic engineering is also expected to increase productivity. The stomata might be altered to boost carbon dioxide intake or cut down water loss. The
efficiency of the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which captures CO₂ in plant cells could be
improved. A team of Japanese scientists is working on introducing the C4 cycle into rice. Unlike C3 plants, C4 plants are more efficient in carbon capture. These
modifications would require more complex engineering than single gene transfers that have been done so far.

Production of Products
Single gene transfers have allowed plants to produce human hormones, clotting factors and
antibodies that can deliver radioisotopes to tumor cells or be used in treatments. Clinical trials are ongoing for various applications.

Recently, a group of scientists in California reported that they have been able to
introduce a human gene into adult wheat by-passing the need for tissue culture and produce an
enzyme that can be used to treat various conditions in a crop of tobacco plants.