COORDINATION AND CONTROL

INTRODUCTION
| An organism shows certain common characteristics - one of them is to respond to
stimuli. These stimuli may be internal or external, at molecular, sub-cellular, cellular or
organism level - to which the organisms respond. The activities of different body parts in
| response to these stimuli must be coordinated. The coordination makes possible the
integration of functions essential to organismic behaviour.

: Coordination is must for any organism to survive. In the unicellular organisms
coordination exists between various cellular processes, and they respond to changes in
their environments such as temperature, light intensity, concentration of various
chemicals and even to electric current.

In multi-cellular organisms, although there is a division of labour among cells yet
every cell can respond to changes in its immediate vicinity. It must be noted that even the
most highly developed organisms, e.g. we humans are unable to detect and respond to
: many changes or stimuli in our environment. We are unaware and not able to respond to
| presence of bacteria on the surface of our body, because our sensory cells do not detect
their presence - but some of our internal body cells do respond and produce chemicals or
phagocytose them to destroy them. We are unable to see different radiations except for
visible spectrum of light, but our body cells do respond to some of them.

: | COORDINATION IN PLANTS :
| CONTROL THROUGH HORMONES |
: Plants, as compared to animals are far from being passive, and are complex
: dynamic organisms that grow, change, react to external/internal stimuli, and show
| response. It is no exaggeration to say that plants behave but their behavior is
fundamentally different from that of animals. The difference is due to two ways of life —
| sessile on one hand and motile on the other. Much of the behavior of plants depends on
variations in growth rates, or changes in the turgidity of cells, when they show
movements. The most obvious difference is in the slow speed of response shown by
plants. | BC

Animals have evolved tissues like muscles, specialized for production of rapid
movements. Plants and animals employ different ways to respond and have evolved
control systems accordingly. In plants the control is solely by the plant hormones while in
animals much more variety of hormones and the nervous control, make them respond
with greater speed to specific stimuli.


Hormonal control in plants is relatively a slow process. Even after hormone is
synthesized there is delay between the release, its arrival at the target cell and its
action in the body. So, response to stimulus that induced the secretion of hormone is
usually not immediate. Keeping in view the slowness of the mechanisms of plant
movement, the delay involved in hormonal control is insignificant. All the activities of
plants from growth to fruit production and ripening are under the control of plant
hormones.

Plants therefore, respond to the stimuli by:
1. Regulating their growth and development in appropriate ways.
2. Controlling their body functions through plant hormones or growth hormones.

PLANT MOVEMENTS
You have studied these in the previous chapter. Many plants do not show
locomotion (movement of the whole organism). However, movements of plant organs are
possible and are modified according to the nature and intensity of external stimuli. There
are two kinds of plant movements, autonomic movements and paratonic movements.

RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL STRESSES IN PLANTS
All plants need water, light, carbon dioxide and a variety of nutrients from their
environment for optimal development and growth. The absence or short supply of any of
these factors in environment may exert environmental stresses on plants affecting their
health and survival. If plants are grown without light, they become extremely long and
fail to form chlorophyll. They are said to be etiolated.

Many plants take on a yellowish hue when they fail to form sufficient
chlorophyll. This condition known as chlorosis usually arises from short supplies
of mineral nutrients in the soil.

DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENS IN PLANTS
Diseases of plants may arise from infections by viruses, bacteria, fungi or lichens
in most cases. You have already studied different diseases caused by the above
mentioned pathogens in class XI.

Plants may also show developmental abnormalities. If plants are wounded, they
often develop masses of amorphous material with very poor differentiation known as
calluses. Plant tumors and even plant cancers may arise and spread through the plant as
an amorphous invasion of surrounding well-differentiated tissues. Galls are growths on a
plant that are induced by parasites and have usually highly organized growth e.g. The tumors
caused by bacteria. They are usually less differentiated than other types of galls.

BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS AND CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS
In living things, the behaviour activities occur at regular intervals which are called
biorhythms or biological rhythms. Biorhythms may occur showing periodicity of about
24-hours. These are called circadian (Latin circa = about, dies = day) which means about
one day, so they are also called diurnal rhythms.

If the biorhythms are of about 365 days, these rhythms in activity are called
circannual.

The organisms come across environmental changes that are cyclical in nature
such as days, tides, and seasons etc. Many organisms maintain internal rhythm or clock,
| to predict the onset of the periodic changes and to keep them prepared for these changes.

Biorhythms may be the result of the following:
1. There may be direct response to various changes in the external (exogenous)
stimuli.
2. There may be an internal (endogenous) rhythm that progresses the organism’s
behaviour in synchronicity with the exogenous temporal period, particularly a 24
hour or a 365 day period.
3. The synchronization mechanism may be a combination of 1 and 2.

The rhythms are in one’s genes but the environment influences the rhythms to
some extent. Thus timing of behaviour results from a combination of effects of rhythmic
internal processes and timed events of the environment.

PLANT HORMONES
Some of the special substances produced by the plants which influence the
growth and plant responses to various stimuli are given below.

(a) Auxins: These are indole acetic acid (IAA) or its variants.
• In stem, promote cell enlargement in region behind apex. Promote cell division in
cambium.
• In root, promote growth at very low concentrations. Inhibit growth at higher
concentrations e.g. geotropism. Promote growth of roots from cuttings and
calluses.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots but sometimes antagonistic to cytokinins and is
inhibitory.
• Promote apical dominance and fruit growth. They can sometimes induce
parthenocarpy.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence (aging) in a few species.
• Inhibit abscission.

Commercial applications: Discovery of IAA led to the synthesis of wide range of
compounds by chemists. The synthetic auxins are economical compared to IAA to produce and
often more active because plants generally do not have necessary enzymes to break them
down.

NAA (Naphthalene acetic acid) — Stimulates fruiting, help natural fruit set. Sometimes
causes fruit setting in absence of pollination (parthenocarpy).
Indole propionic acid — parthenocarpy.
2,4-D (2,4 Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) — Selective weed killer: kills broad-leaved
species (dicots). Used in cereal crops and lawns to eliminate weeds.
• Inhibits sprouting of potatoes.
• Prevents premature fruit drop (retards abscission).

(b) Gibberellins: These are produced commercially from fungal cultures.
• Promote cell enlargement in the presence of auxins. Also promote cell division in
apical meristem and cambium.
• Promote ‘bolting’ of some rosette plants.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots of chrysanthemum callus.
• Promote leaf growth and fruit growth. May induce parthenocarpy.
• In apical dominance, enhance action of auxins.
• Break bud and seed dormancy.
• Sometimes may substitute for red light. Therefore, promote flowering in long-
day plants, while inhibit in short-day plants.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence in a few species.


Commercial applications:
• Increase the length of internodes of sugarcane.
• Increase the size of grapes.
• Malting of barley and other cereals.
• Promote the formation of male flowers in cucurbits.

(c) Cytokinins:
• Promote cell division in presence of auxins.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots. Sometimes antagonistic to auxins.
• Promote leaf growth. Can delay senescence in leaves.
• Enhance lateral bud growth.

Commercial applications:
• Tissue culture (promote shoot growth from callus).
• Delay senescence in vegetables and cut flowers.
• Improve shelf-life of green vegetables.

(d) Abscisic acid (ABA):
• Inhibitor of growth.
• Promotes leaf fall (abscission).
• Promotes dormancy in buds and seeds.
• Antagonistic to gibberellins.
• Promotes closing of stomata during water stress.

(e) Ethylene:
• Promotes fruit ripening.
• Induces epinasty.
• Promotes leaf fall and senescence.
• Promotes root initiation.
• Inhibits elongation of stem.

Commercial applications:
• Artificial ripening of fruits.
• Break dormancy in some seeds.
• Promote flowering in pineapple.

TROPIC MOVEMENTS
In tropic movements, plants respond to directional stimuli and show directional
growth movements. The response is always towards (positive) or away from (negative)
the source of stimulus.

Types of tropisms:
1. Phototropism — response to light.
2. Geotropism — response to gravity.
3. Thigmotropism — response to touch.
4. Chemotropism — response to chemicals.
5. Hydrotropism — response to water.


**PHOTOTROPISM**
Phototropism is growth movement in response to light. Stems are positively
phototropic while roots are negatively phototropic.

Experiments:
Charles Darwin and his son Francis found that the tip of a coleoptile detects
light. Boysen-Jensen showed that a chemical diffuses from the tip and causes bending.
Later this chemical was identified as auxin.

When light shines from one side:
• Auxin diffuses towards the shaded side.
• Cells on the shaded side elongate more.
• Stem bends towards light.

**GEOTROPISM**
Growth movement in response to gravity.
• Stem shows negative geotropism.
• Roots show positive geotropism.

Statolith theory: Specialized starch-filled organelles (statoliths) settle under gravity,
helping cells perceive the direction of gravity. Auxin distribution then controls bending.

**THIGMOTROPISM**
Movement in response to touch.
Examples:  
• Tendrils of pea and grapevine coil around support.  
• Climbing plants use this mechanism.

**HYDROTROPISM**
Growth movement towards water.
• Roots grow towards moisture.
• Overrides geotropism when water is lateral.

**CHEMOTROPISM**
Growth due to chemicals.
Example:  
• Growth of pollen tube towards ovule due to chemical attractants.

**NASTIC MOVEMENTS**
These movements do not depend on direction of stimulus. They depend only on
intensity.

Types:
1. Photonasty — due to light intensity (opening and closing of petals).
2. Thermonasty — due to temperature.
3. Seismonasty — due to shock or touch.

Example:
*Sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica)* folds its leaflets on touch due to change in turgor
pressure in pulvinus (a swollen structure at base of leaflet).

**CONTROL SYSTEMS IN PLANTS**
Plants lack nerves, muscles and a central nervous system. Their control is mainly
through:
• Plant hormones
• Changes in turgor
• Growth responses

PLANT-WATER RELATIONS AND OSMOTIC CONTROL
Plants absorb water mainly through osmosis. Xylem vessels conduct water from
roots to leaves. Transpiration from leaves creates suction.

During water stress:
• Stomata close (ABA plays role).
• Growth slows.
• Wilting occurs due to loss of turgor.

**SALT STRESS**
High salt concentration causes plasmolysis.
Plants adopt mechanisms:
• Accumulate solutes (osmotic adjustment)
• Exclude salts  
• Store salts in vacuoles

**TEMPERATURE STRESS**
High temperature:
• Denatures enzymes.
• Disrupts membranes.
• Plants produce heat-shock proteins (HSPs) to protect enzymes.

Low temperature:
• Causes chilling injury by increasing membrane rigidity.
• Freezing produces ice crystals.
• Some plants accumulate solutes to prevent freezing (supercooling).

**PLANT DEFENSE AGAINST HERBIVORES**
Plants defend themselves by:
• Thorns and spines
• Chemicals (alkaloids, tannins)
• Latex
• Tough leaves
• Symbiotic relationships (e.g., ants in acacia)

**HORMONAL COORDINATION SUMMARY**
Auxins — elongation, apical dominance, root growth  
Gibberellins — elongation, germination, bolting  
Cytokinins — cell division, delayed senescence  
Ethylene — ripening, abscission  
ABA — dormancy, closing stomata, stress responses


Working of Sensory Receptors with Special Reference to Skin
In the skin there are at least 3 different types of sensory endings involved in

touch stimulus reception. In skin, the receptors are concerned with at least five different

senses: touch, pressure, heat, cold and pain.

1. Situated at the base of hairs, hair end organs receive touch stimulus.

2. Meissner’s corpuscles (encapsulated endings) which lie in papillae which extend
into the ridges of the fingertips. The corpuscle consists of spiral and much
twisted endings, each of which ends in a knob. These are touch receptors.

3. Pacinian corpuscles - situated quite deep in the body. These are also encapsulated

neuron endings and receive deep pressure stimulus. Those located in the limbs
probably form a basis for vibration sense. The detection of
vibrations of the ground
by terrestrial vertebrates
is probably achieved by
receptors in the joints.

The intensity of stimulus received would either be transmitted in the form of repeated
impulses or by more fibres carrying the impulse to the CNS.

The relative abundance of various types of receptors differs greatly e.g. pain
receptors are nearly 27 times more abundant than cold receptors. The cold receptors are
nearly 10 times more abundant than heat or temperature receptors. The receptors are not
distributed evenly over the entire surface of the body e.g. touch receptors are much more
numerous in the fingertips than in the skin of the back, as might be expected in view of
the normal functions of those two parts of the body.

The stimulus received by the receptors in the skin which are the endings of
sensory neurons is passed to the motor neurons via inter or associative neurons which are
present in the brain and via spinal cord impulse is sent by the motor neurons to the
effectors, which are muscles and glands (Fig. 17.1).

Free nerve _______________________________________________
endings (pain)

Muscles
(touch)

Fig. 17.1 Sensory receptors
of the skin. Pacini

The sensations of touch, pressure,
pressure, heat, cold, and pain
are detected by modified
sensory neurons having naked
nerve endings (touch and pain
receptors) or specialized
cellular corpuscles (pressure,
hot and cold receptors).

2. Neurons
The chief structural and functional units of the nervous system are neurons, but
there are other cells, in higher animals, and in humans called neuroglia, which make up
as much as half of the nervous system. Neuroglia play a vital role in the nutrition of
neurons and their protection by myelin sheath. There are three functional types of
neurons — the sensory, associative (intermediate/relay) and motor neurons, in mammals
(Fig. 17.2)

Dendrite                Dendrite
Cell body               Cell body

Receptor cell           Dendrite
                        Dendron
                        Myelin sheath
                        Axon
                        Schwann cell
                        Node

Cell body
Neuromuscular
junction
Muscle

Fig. 17.2 A variety of neuron types in human beings
(a) The dendrites, unlike the axon, often give a spiny look. (b) The dendrites of certain brain cells
branch profusely, giving the cell a treelike appearance. (c) Motor neurons have long axons that
run from the C. nervous system to the effector (muscle); those axons are frequently, but not always,
myelinated. Note the presence of many granules in the cell body and dendrites and their absence
from the axon. (d) Many sensory neurons have only one fiber, which branches a short distance
from the cell body. The peripheral branch (running between the receptor site and the dorsal-root
ganglion in which the cell-body is located) and the other branch (central) running from the
ganglion into the spinal cord or brain. Except for its terminal portions, the entire fiber is
structurally and functionally of the axon type, even though the peripheral branch conducts
impulses toward the cell. A sensory neuron of this type thus has no true dendrites although
the peripheral branch is often called a dendron because of the direction in which it conducts.

The neuron has protoplasmic processes arising from its cell body containing
nucleus and various organelles embedded in the cytoplasm. There are two main types of
cytoplasmic processes or fibres. The one which carries impulse towards the cell body is
called dendron, if it is a single fibre, but if smaller fibres, they are called dendrites (singular:
dendrite). The processes conducting impulses away from the cell body are termed axons.
These may be more than a meter long in some neurons. Nissl’s granules which are
groups of ribosomes associated with rough E.R, and Golgi apparatus are present in the
cell body. Microtubules, neurofibrils, rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria
are present throughout the axoplasm (cytoplasm of axon) of the neuron.

The cell body or soma is the main nutritional part of the cell and is concerned
with the biosynthesis of materials necessary for the growth and maintenance of the
neuron. If the cell body of the neuron remains intact, it can regenerate axonal and
dendrite fibres; but neurons once mature, do not divide any further.

3. Effectors
These are the structures which respond when they are stimulated by impulse
coming via motor neuron. The principal effectors are glands, which respond by secreting;
and muscles which respond by contracting.

Flow of information through the nervous system is explained with the help of a
reflex arc.

Reflex Arc
Flow of impulse through the nervous system involving receptors, neurons, and
effectors will be clear if we study an example of a reflex arc. Reflex arc is the pathway
of passage of impulse during a reflex action. Reflex action is a type of involuntary action.
(Fig. 17.3). The direction of stimulus is from receptors to sensory neuron to associative
(association/relay) neuron and then through motor neuron to the effectors.

Effectors will be clear if we study an example of a reflex arc. Reflex arc is the pathway
of passage of impulse during a reflex action. Reflex action is a type of involuntary action.
(Fig. 17.3). The direction of stimulus is from receptors to sensory neuron to associative
(association / relay) neuron and then through motor neuron to the effectors.

Nerve Impulse

Nerve impulse is a wave of electrochemical changes, which travels along the
length of the neuron involving chemical reactions and movement of ions across the cell
membrane. Electrical potential is a measure of the capacity to do electrical work. It
represents a type of stored energy which is manifested during separation of charges
across a barrier. In the case of neuron, the charges are positive and negative ions, and the
charge-separating barrier is the plasma membrane. The electrical potential that exists
across a cell membrane is known as membrane potential. A typical neuron at rest is
more positive electrically outside than inside the cell membrane. This net difference in
charge between the inner and the outer surface of a non-conducting neuron is called the
resting membrane potential. The major factors which are involved in resting membrane
potential are:

1. Sodium and potassium ions: Of the many kinds of ions present in the nerve
cells and the surrounding fluid, sodium (Na⁺) and potassium (K⁺) ions are the
most important. Sodium ions are tenfold higher in concentration outside than
inside the membrane surface, whereas potassium ions are twenty times more
concentrated inside than outside. All the neurons have very active sodium and
potassium pumps located in their cell membranes. Driven by the splitting of
ATP, these pumps transport Na⁺ out and K⁺ into the cell, both against their
respective concentration gradients. For every two K⁺ that are actively transported
inward, three Na⁺ are pumped out. So inside becomes more negative than the
outside of the cell membrane of neurons. (Fig. 17.4).

2. Negative organic ions: The large negative organic ions (such as proteins,
organic acids etc.) are much more inside the membrane than outside, where they
are only in negligible concentration. This makes the inside of neuron membrane
more negative.

3. Leakage of K⁺ ions from neurons: The cell membrane is virtually
impermeable to all ions except K⁺. Since the membrane is slightly permeable to
K⁺, some of it leaks out of the cell. The loss of this positive ion from the neuron
by diffusion accounts for more negative charges inside than outside the cell
membrane of neuron.


Relative ion
concentration

Outside neuron:
K⁺
Na⁺

Active exchange
100

Inside neuron:
K⁺
Na⁺
Organic ion
(negatively charged)

Fig. 17.4 Resting potential

(a) In the unstimulated state, a neuron has a membrane potential of approximately -70 mV. The
relative concentrations of the principal ions inside and outside the neuron are indicated by the
sizes of the chemical symbols (Na⁺ = sodium ion, K⁺ = potassium ion). (b) Two of the major
processes that contribute to the negative resting potential are the active exchange of Na⁺ for K⁺,
and the outward diffusion of K⁺. The sodium-potassium pump actively transports Na⁺ out and
K⁺ into the cell, and is powered by the splitting of ATP by an associated enzyme, ATPase.

2. Charges are reversed: The inner side of the cell membrane has excess of
positive ions (thus positive charges) at its internal surface, and the outer surface
becomes more negative.

Stimulus
+50

Fig. 17.5 Active or action potential
(a) When a neuron is stimulated, the cell membrane at the point of stimulation undergoes a
momentary reversal in charge (dark color) called an action potential. Perhaps for a millisecond,
the inside of the membrane becomes positive relative to the outside. (b) Sequence of membrane
potential changes associated with an action potential: (1) resting potential (polarized state); (2)
sodium gates open and Na⁺ diffuses into the cell, causing a depolarization of the membrane; (3)
sodium gates close and potassium gates open; (4) K⁺ diffuses out, causing a repolarization of the
membrane; (5) sodium-potassium pump restores original ion gradients and resting potential
(recovery). Steps (2)–(5) take a mere 2–3 milliseconds.

3. Passage of nerve impulse: During active membrane potential, the neuron
conducts the impulse in the form of nerve impulse.

4. Membrane potential: Active membrane potential of +0.05 volts (+50 mV) exists.
These changes occur along the length of neuron till the impulse reaches synapse.

After the passage of the impulse, the resting membrane potential is restored by the
movement of a small number of ions especially K⁺ moving out. This neuron now is ready
for the next stimulus.

It may be added that in myelinated fibres, the normal speed of nerve impulse in
humans is 100 meters per second but the maximum speed recorded is 120 meters
per second.

In myelinated fibres the impulse jumps from node to node (Node of Ranvier). This is called
saltatory impulse.

Synapse
Consecutive neurons are so arranged that the axon endings of one neuron are
connected to the dendrites of the next neuron. There is no cytoplasmic connection
between the two neurons and microscopic gaps are left between them. Each of these
contact points is known as synapse.

A single neuron may form synapses with many incoming fibres of different
neurons.

A nerve impulse is passed from one neuron to the other through the synapse, but
a single impulse does not necessarily get across the synapse. It may take two or three
impulses arriving in rapid succession or perhaps simultaneously from two or more fibres
to start an impulse in the next neuron.

The action potential cannot jump from one neuron to the next in line; rather the
message is transmitted across synapse in the form of chemical messenger called
neurotransmitter.

Presynaptic neuron
Synaptic vesicles
containing
neurotransmitter
molecules

Presynaptic
membrane

Synaptic cleft

Postsynaptic
membrane

Fig. 17.6 Communication across a synapse
When an impulse reaches a synaptic knob, synaptic vesicles within fuse with the
presynaptic membrane, causing the release of neurotransmitter molecules into the
synaptic cleft. The neurotransmitter molecules bind to the receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane, triggering an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron, by causing changes
in its permeability to certain ions. (Fig. 17.6)

Neurotransmitters are chemicals which are released at the axon ending of the
neurons, at synapse. Many different types of neurotransmitters are known. These are:
acetylcholine, adrenaline, nor-epinephrine, serotonin and dopamine.

Acetylcholine is the main transmitter for synapses that lie outside the central
nervous system. Others are mostly involved in synaptic transmission within the brain and
spinal cord.

Evolution of Nervous System

There are two designs of nervous system in the animal kingdom.

(i) A diffused nervous system, such as that of Cnidarians (Hydra, jellyfish and their
relatives)

(ii) A centralized nervous system, found to varying degrees in more complex
organisms, from platyhelminthes to chordates including humans.

To understand the organization of the above-mentioned types of nervous system,
we would study them in Hydra, Planaria and humans. Nervous system design is highly
co-related with the animal’s lifestyle. The first main type of nervous system is a diffused
nervous system. Hydra shows this type of nervous system (Fig. 17.7a).

Hydra, a cnidarian, is a small animal which is sedentary in its lifestyle and prey
and other dangers are equally likely to come from any direction. Its nervous system
consists of a network of neurons, which is present between the ectoderm and endoderm.
There is no head in this animal and so there is no centralized nervous system i.e. no brain
and nerve cords etc. However, a cluster of cell bodies of neurons forming ganglia can be
seen here and there. It has been observed that neurons are so arranged in the network that
it is not possible to distinguish them in connected functional types of neurons as in higher
animals i.e. there are no sensory, associative (inter/relay) neurons, or motor neurons.

There are no specialized sense organs in this animal. It has been observed and
studied that when an appropriate stimulus is given, Hydra responds and almost the
whole body of the animal responds as a unit. The tentacles are more responsive and react
to the stimulus instantaneously (Fig. 17.7a).


The second type of nervous system is present in Planaria (Fig. 17.7b) and
humans. It is centralized nervous system. The nervous system of Planaria is better
developed as compared with that of Hydra because in Planaria:

(i) There is beginning of a centralized nervous system. In the anterior region of the
body of planaria, there is a bilobed mass composed of two ganglia. This acts as a
“brain” or a centralized collection of neurons. This receives and sends impulses
from and to different parts of the body. There is no such concentration of neurons
or a coordinating centre in Hydra — only a network of neurons is present.

(ii) There is differentiation of neurons into sensory, associative and motor neurons. In
Planaria, associative neurons are present in the brain and longitudinal nerves.
Sensory neurons carry impulse to “brain” or nerves and motor neurons carry
impulse from central nervous system to different parts of the body. In Hydra
there is no differentiation of neurons.

(iii) In Planaria at the anterior region, sense organs in the form of eyes and
chemoreceptors are present. There are no specialized sensory organs in Hydra.

(iv) The receptor cells sensitive to pressure and touch are present in Planaria. There are
no specialized sensory cells in Hydra, but some nerve cells are more sensitive to a
particular stimulus — chemical or mechanical — than others.

(v) There are definite nerves, the longitudinal and lateral in Planaria. There are no
nerves in Hydra.

(vi) In Planaria in addition to a superficial nerve net just below epidermis, there
is a deeper plexus embedded in the parenchyma. In Hydra only a superficial
nerve net is present (Fig. 17.7a).

Fig. 17.7 Nervous systems in Hydra and Planaria.

Human nervous system is a type of centralized nervous system. Its classification
in different subdivisions and different functions performed by these subdivisions are
given in Fig 17.8.

Central Nervous System (CNS)
(receives and processes information;
stores memories;
generates thought)

Brain
Spinal Cord

Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
(transmits signals between the CNS
and the rest of the body)

Sensory neurons
(conduct signals from sensory organs to CNS)

Motor neurons
(conduct signals from CNS to effectors)

Somatic nervous system
(controls voluntary activities by activating
skeletal muscles)

Autonomic nervous system
(controls involuntary activities)

Sympathetic division
Parasympathetic division

Fig. 17.8 Classification of the human nervous system

Central Nervous System (CNS)

The CNS consists of brain (Fig. 17.9) and spinal cord, which are both protected
in three ways. Cranium, which is a part of skull, protects the brain and neural arches of
vertebrae of vertebral column protect the spinal cord. The brain and spinal cord are also
protected by triple layers of meninges. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), similar in
composition to blood plasma, bathes the neurons of brain and spinal cord and it
cushions against the bumps and jolts. Both brain and spinal cord are hollow. The spinal cord
has central canal and brain has many cavities (ventricles) filled by CSF, which is
also present between the meninges.

Brain: The brain can be divided into forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. Forebrain is
further divided into three functional parts, the thalamus, the limbic system (Fig. 17.10)
and the cerebrum. Thalamus carries sensory information to the limbic system and
cerebrum. The information includes sensory input from auditory and visual pathways,
from the skin and from within the body.

Cerebral Cortex
Meninges
Skull

Hypothalamus
Pituitary Gland
Pineal

Midbrain
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Amygdala

17.10 The limbic system and thalamus
The limbic system extends through several
brain regions. It seems to be the center of
most unconscious emotional behaviors,
such as love, hate, anger, hunger, sexual
responses, and fear. The thalamus is a
crucial relay center among the senses, the
limbic system, and the cerebral cortex.


The limbic system is located in an arc between the thalamus and cerebrum.
Limbic system works together to produce our most basic and primitive emotions, drives,
and behaviours, including fear, rage, tranquillity, hunger, thirst, pleasure and sexual
responses. Portion of limbic system is also important in the formation of memories. The
limbic system consists of hypothalamus, the amygdala, and hippocampus, as well as
nearby regions of cerebrum. The hypothalamus through its hormone production and
neural connections acts as a major co-ordinating centre controlling body temperature,
water balance, the sleep-wake cycle etc.

In the amygdala, clusters of neurons produce sensation of pleasure, punishment or
sexual arousal when stimulated. It is also involved in the feelings of fear and rage.
Hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of long-term memory, and
thus is required for learning. Cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is divided into
two halves, called cerebral hemispheres. These halves communicate with each other by
means of a large band of axons, called corpus callosum. Tens of billions of neurons are
packed into this part. The outer region, the cerebral cortex, forms folds called
convolutions, which greatly increase its surface area. This part receives sensory
information, processes it, stores some in memory for future use, directs voluntary
movements, and is responsible for the poorly understood process that we call thinking.

The cerebral cortex contains primary sensory areas where signals originating in
sensory organs such as eyes and ears are received and converted into subjective
impressions, such as light and sound. Nearby association areas interpret this information.
This area is also involved in speech and also receives and interprets sensations of touch
from all parts of the body. This area is also a centre for sending impulses to voluntary
muscles, controlling movements. This is also involved in intelligence, reasoning and
judgement.

The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right side of the body, and right
cerebral hemisphere controls the left side of the body. Midbrain is reduced in humans,
and it contains auditory relay centre and centre that controls reflex movements of eyes.
Midbrain contains reticular formation, which is a relay centre connecting hindbrain with
the forebrain. Reticular formation is very important in screening the input information,
before they reach higher brain centres. Hindbrain includes the medulla, pons and
cerebellum. Medulla controls several automatic functions, such as breathing, heart rate,
blood pressure and swallowing. Certain neurons in pons, located above the medulla,
appear to influence transitions between sleep and wakefulness, and the rate and pattern of
breathing. The cerebellum is important in co-ordinating movements of the body. The
cerebellum guides smooth and accurate motions and maintains body position. The
cerebellum is also involved in the learning and memory storage for behaviours. It is best
developed in birds which are engaged in the complex activity of flight.

Spinal Cord: Medulla oblongata narrows down into an oval shaped hollow cylinder,
the spinal cord, running through the vertebral column. It is made up of a very large
number of neurons, the cell-fibres and bodies of which are arranged in a definite pattern.
In cross section, the spinal cord shows an inner butterfly-shaped grey matter, containing a
central canal and the outer portion composed of white matter. Gray matter, as in other
parts of nervous system, consists of cell bodies and non-myelinated nerve fibres or tracts.
White matter is made up of myelinated nerve fibres or tracts.

The spinal cord is the centre for great many reflexes and
it serves as a pathway for
conduction of impulses to and
from different parts of the body
and brain (Fig 17.11).

Peripheral Nervous
System (PNS)

It comprises sensory
neurons and motor neurons,
which may form ganglia and the
nerves. Ganglia are the
concentrations of cell bodies of
neurons. The nerves are the
bundles of axons or dendrites,
bounded by connective tissue.
They may be sensory, motor or
mixed nerves depending upon the
direction of impulse they
conduct. In humans, there are 12
pairs of nerves, which arise from
the brain, or lead to the brain.
These nerves are called cerebral
or cranial nerves. Some of these
nerves are sensory, some motor,
and some are mixed. From the
spinal cord 31 pairs of spinal nerves
arise or lead to spinal cord. All these
nerves are mixed having fibres of
both sensory and motor neurons.

Motor neurons form somatic nervous system, which controls voluntary
movements, which are under the conscious control of the body, involving skeletal
muscles. Motor neurons also form autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary
responses by influencing organs, glands and smooth muscles. The autonomic nervous
system is further divided into sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous
system (Fig 17.9).

Autonomic Nervous System:

The motor neurons of autonomic nervous system are divided into the sympathetic
and parasympathetic system. Both of these systems function automatically, innervate all
internal organs, utilise two neurons and one ganglion for each impulse.

Sympathetic system: Most ganglion fibres of the sympathetic system arise from the
middle portion of the spinal cord and almost terminate in ganglia that lie near the cord.
This system is important during emergency situations and is associated with “fight or
flight”. This system accelerates the heartbeat, dilates the pupil and inhibits the digestion
of food etc.

The limbic system is located in an arc between the thalamus and cerebrum.
Limbic system works together to produce our most basic and primitive emotions, drives,
and behaviours, including fear, rage, tranquillity, hunger, thirst, pleasure and sexual
responses. Portion of limbic system is also important in the formation of memories. The
limbic system consists of hypothalamus, the amygdala, and hippocampus, as well as
nearby regions of cerebrum. The hypothalamus through its hormone production and
neural connections acts as a major co-ordinating centre controlling body temperature,
water balance, the sleep-wake cycle etc.

In the amygdala, clusters of neurons produce sensation of pleasure, punishment or
sexual arousal when stimulated. It is also involved in the feelings of fear and rage.
Hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of long-term memory, and
thus is required for learning. Cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is divided into
two halves, called cerebral hemispheres. These halves communicate with each other by
means of a large band of axons, called corpus callosum. Tens of billions of neurons are
packed into this part. The outer region, the cerebral cortex, forms folds called
convolutions, which greatly increase its surface area. This part receives sensory
information, processes it, stores some in memory for future use, directs voluntary
movements, and is responsible for the poorly understood process that we call thinking.

The cerebral cortex contains primary sensory areas where signals originating in
sensory organs such as eyes and ears are received and converted into subjective
impressions, such as light and sound. Nearby association areas interpret this information.
This area is also involved in speech and also receives and interprets sensations of touch
from all parts of the body. This area is also a centre for sending impulses to voluntary
muscles, controlling movements. This is also involved in intelligence, reasoning and
judgement.

The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right side of the body, and right
cerebral hemisphere controls the left side of the body. Midbrain is reduced in humans,
and it contains auditory relay centre and centre that controls reflex movements of eyes.
Midbrain contains reticular formation, which is a relay centre connecting hindbrain with
the forebrain. Reticular formation is very important in screening the input information,
before they reach higher brain centres. Hindbrain includes the medulla, pons and
cerebellum. Medulla controls several automatic functions, such as breathing, heart rate,
blood pressure and swallowing. Certain neurons in pons, located above the medulla,
appear to influence transitions between sleep and wakefulness, and the rate and pattern of
breathing. The cerebellum is important in co-ordinating movements of the body. The
cerebellum guides smooth and accurate motions and maintains body position. The
cerebellum is also involved in the learning and memory storage for behaviours. It is best
developed in birds which are engaged in the complex activity of flight.

Spinal Cord: Medulla oblongata narrows down into an oval shaped hollow cylinder,
the spinal cord, running through the vertebral column. It is made up of a very large
number of neurons, the cell-fibres and bodies of which are arranged in a definite pattern.
In cross section, the spinal cord shows an inner butterfly-shaped grey matter, containing a
central canal and the outer portion composed of white matter. Gray matter, as in other
parts of nervous system, consists of cell bodies and non-myelinated nerve fibres or tracts.
White matter is made up of myelinated nerve fibres or tracts.

The spinal cord is the centre for great many reflexes and
it serves as a pathway for
conduction of impulses to and
from different parts of the body
and brain (Fig 17.11).

Peripheral Nervous
System (PNS)

It comprises sensory
neurons and motor neurons,
which may form ganglia and the
nerves. Ganglia are the
concentrations of cell bodies of
neurons. The nerves are the
bundles of axons or dendrites,
bounded by connective tissue.
They may be sensory, motor or
mixed nerves depending upon the
direction of impulse they
conduct. In humans, there are 12
pairs of nerves, which arise from
the brain, or lead to the brain.
These nerves are called cerebral
or cranial nerves. Some of these
nerves are sensory, some motor,
and some are mixed. From the
spinal cord 31 pairs of spinal nerves
arise or lead to spinal cord. All these
nerves are mixed having fibres of
both sensory and motor neurons.

Motor neurons form somatic nervous system, which controls voluntary
movements, which are under the conscious control of the body, involving skeletal
muscles. Motor neurons also form autonomic nervous system, which controls involuntary
responses by influencing organs, glands and smooth muscles. The autonomic nervous
system is further divided into sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous
system (Fig 17.9).

Autonomic Nervous System:

The motor neurons of autonomic nervous system are divided into the sympathetic
and parasympathetic system. Both of these systems function automatically, innervate all
internal organs, utilise two neurons and one ganglion for each impulse.

Sympathetic system: Most ganglion fibres of the sympathetic system arise from the
middle portion of the spinal cord and almost terminate in ganglia that lie near the cord.
This system is important during emergency situations and is associated with “fight or
flight”. This system accelerates the heartbeat, dilates the pupil and inhibits the digestion
of food etc.

The parasympathetic system promotes all the internal responses which are
associated with a relaxed state. For example, it promotes digestion of food, retards
heartbeat etc.

Comparison of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems

Sympathetic nervous system
• Stimulates the body systems associated with flight and fight responses.
• Heart rate speeds up.
• Inhibits digestion.
• Dilates bronchi.
• Dilates pupil of the eye.
• Stimulates release of glucose from liver (to provide energy).
• Inhibits secretion of tears.
• Stimulates sweating.
• Inhibits urination.
• Causes ejaculation.

Parasympathetic nervous system
• Promotes all the internal responses associated with a relaxed state.
• Heart rate slows down.
• Promotes digestion.
• Constricts bronchi.
• Constricts pupil of the eye.
• Stimulates bile secretion (digestion).
• Stimulates tear secretion.
• Inhibits sweating.
• Stimulates urination.
• Causes erection of penis.


Entire human body remains under constant control of the nervous system and
endocrine system. Both these systems coordinate their activities to maintain normal
working of the body.

The nervous system is the body’s primary communication and control system. It
uses electrical signals to rapidly transmit information. The body’s second great control
system, the endocrine system, produces hormones that work with the nervous system and
help regulate various functions.

Hormones are secreted into the blood by the endocrine glands. Hormones produce
their effect quite slowly either by producing long-lasting responses quite unlike the
responses given by organs, which are stimulated through the nervous system.

The endocrine system along with nervous system controls and co-ordinates all body’s
functions such as responses to stress, body fluid and electrolytic balances, growth and
reproduction. These are mediated by chemical co-ordinators called hormones.

Hormones are organic compounds which are secreted in very minute quantities
from the endocrine glands. They take part in the control and co-ordination of the body
functions.

Characteristics of Hormones

• Hormones are secreted by glands, called endocrine glands. These ducts are not
connected to any body system. These secrete hormones directly into the
bloodstream.

• Hormones are transmitted to different parts of the body by blood.

• Only specific tissues respond to specific hormones because only those tissues
contain hormone receptors. Thus the tissues affected by a hormone are called
target tissues.

• Hormones have specific chemical composition.

• Hormones work in very small quantities.

• They control and coordinate a large number of physiological activities in the
body.


Hormones generally have long-lasting effects, although some hormones may act
quickly but at the same time their effect is long-lasting.

Endocrinology

The study of endocrine glands and hormones is called endocrinology.

Types of Hormones

According to chemical composition, hormones may be divided into three groups:

(i) Steroid hormones: These are secreted by adrenal cortex, ovaries and testes.
These are lipid-soluble. They easily pass through the cell membrane and act
directly on DNA of the nucleus.

(ii) Protein or peptide hormones: These are secreted by anterior pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid and pancreas etc. These hormones cannot pass through the cell
membrane; they bind to specific receptors on the cell surface.

(iii) Amine hormones: These are derived from amino acids and secreted by thyroid
and adrenal medulla.


Mechanism of Hormone Action

Hormone-receptor interactions are very specific. A hormone recognizes its target
tissue only because of specific receptors found on the surface or inside the cells of
target tissue.

Receptors are of two types:

(i) Membrane-bound receptors:
These receptors are present on the cell surface. Peptide and protein hormones
(like insulin, glucagon) cannot pass through the plasma membrane. They bind
with these receptors. This binding activates enzymes inside the cell through
secondary messengers like cyclic AMP (cAMP).

(ii) Intracellular receptors:
These receptors are present inside the cytoplasm or nucleus. Steroid hormones
and thyroid hormones are lipid-soluble so they pass through the cell membrane.
They bind with intracellular receptors and directly activate genes present in DNA.

Characteristics of Hormone Action:

• Hormones act in very low concentration.
• Hormones act only on target tissues.
• The action of hormones is slow but long-lasting.
• After their action, hormones are destroyed in liver or excreted by kidneys.


Hormones generally have long-lasting effects, although some hormones may act
quickly but at the same time their effect is long-lasting.

Endocrinology

The study of endocrine glands and hormones is called endocrinology.

Types of Hormones

According to chemical composition, hormones may be divided into three groups:

(i) Steroid hormones: These are secreted by adrenal cortex, ovaries and testes.
These are lipid-soluble. They easily pass through the cell membrane and act
directly on DNA of the nucleus.

(ii) Protein or peptide hormones: These are secreted by anterior pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid and pancreas etc. These hormones cannot pass through the cell
membrane; they bind to specific receptors on the cell surface.

(iii) Amine hormones: These are derived from amino acids and secreted by thyroid
and adrenal medulla.



Mechanism of Hormone Action

Hormone-receptor interactions are very specific. A hormone recognizes its target
tissue only because of specific receptors found on the surface or inside the cells of
target tissue.

Receptors are of two types:

(i) Membrane-bound receptors:
These receptors are present on the cell surface. Peptide and protein hormones
(like insulin, glucagon) cannot pass through the plasma membrane. They bind
with these receptors. This binding activates enzymes inside the cell through
secondary messengers like cyclic AMP (cAMP).

(ii) Intracellular receptors:
These receptors are present inside the cytoplasm or nucleus. Steroid hormones
and thyroid hormones are lipid-soluble so they pass through the cell membrane.
They bind with intracellular receptors and directly activate genes present in DNA.

Characteristics of Hormone Action:

• Hormones act in very low concentration.
• Hormones act only on target tissues.
• The action of hormones is slow but long-lasting.
• After their action, hormones are destroyed in liver or excreted by kidneys.

Feedback Mechanism

The secretion of many hormones is regulated by feedback mechanisms. The
feedback system detects the amount of hormone in the blood and regulates further
secretion.

There are two types of feedback mechanisms:

(i) Negative feedback mechanism:
If the level of a particular hormone rises above the normal range, the endocrine
gland is inhibited from secreting more of that hormone. This maintains the
hormone level within normal limits.

(ii) Positive feedback mechanism:
In this mechanism, the presence of hormone stimulates the endocrine gland to
secrete more of that hormone. This continues until a specific process is completed.
A common example is the release of oxytocin during childbirth.

Importance of Feedback Mechanism

• Maintains internal balance.
• Prevents overproduction of hormones.
• Ensures proper coordination between endocrine glands.


Endocrine Glands of Human Body

The important endocrine glands in human beings are:

• Pituitary gland  
• Thyroid gland  
• Parathyroid glands  
• Adrenal glands  
• Pancreas  
• Gonads (Testes and Ovaries)  
• Pineal gland  
• Thymus gland  

Pituitary Gland

The pituitary gland is a small pea-sized endocrine gland located at the base of the
brain. It is also called the “master gland” because it controls the activities of many other
endocrine glands.

The pituitary gland has two major parts:

(i) Anterior pituitary  
(ii) Posterior pituitary  

Both parts secrete different hormones and perform different functions.

Functions of Anterior Pituitary:

• Growth Hormone (GH): Controls body growth.
• Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH): Stimulates thyroid gland.
• Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH): Acts on adrenal cortex.
• Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH): Stimulates gonads.
• Luteinizing Hormone (LH): Stimulates ovaries and testes.
• Prolactin: Stimulates milk production.

Functions of Posterior Pituitary:

• Oxytocin: Helps in childbirth and milk ejection.
• ADH (Antidiuretic Hormone): Controls water balance in the body.

Thyroid Gland

The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland located in the neck region, just
below the larynx. It consists of two lobes joined by a narrow band called isthmus.

The thyroid gland secretes two major hormones:

(i) Thyroxine (T4)  
(ii) Triiodothyronine (T3)

Both hormones contain iodine. These hormones regulate:

• Metabolism  
• Growth  
• Development  
• Body temperature  

If iodine is absent in the diet, the thyroid gland enlarges, causing goiter.

Parathyroid Glands

There are four parathyroid glands located on the posterior surface of the thyroid
gland. They secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH).

Functions of PTH:

• Regulates calcium level in blood  
• Increases blood calcium by acting on bones, kidneys and intestines  


Adrenal Glands

There are two adrenal glands, one located on the top of each kidney. Each
adrenal gland has two parts:

(i) Adrenal cortex (outer part)  
(ii) Adrenal medulla (inner part)  

Hormones of Adrenal Cortex:

• Aldosterone: Regulates sodium and potassium balance.  
• Cortisol: Controls metabolism and helps the body cope with stress.  
• Sex hormones: Small amounts of male and female hormones.

Hormones of Adrenal Medulla:

• Adrenaline (epinephrine)  
• Noradrenaline (norepinephrine)  

These hormones prepare the body for emergencies ("fight or flight response").

Functions:

• Increase heartbeat  
• Raise blood pressure  
• Increase breathing rate  
• Raise blood glucose levels  

Pancreas

The pancreas is both an exocrine and endocrine gland. The endocrine part
contains clusters of cells called Islets of Langerhans. These secrete:

• Insulin  
• Glucagon  

Insulin decreases blood sugar while glucagon increases it.

Pancreatic Hormones and Their Functions

Insulin:
• Secreted by beta cells of Islets of Langerhans.
• Lowers blood glucose level.
• Helps glucose enter cells.
• Converts glucose into glycogen (in liver and muscles).

Deficiency of insulin causes diabetes mellitus.

Glucagon:
• Secreted by alpha cells of Islets of Langerhans.
• Raises blood glucose level.
• Converts glycogen into glucose.

Thus, insulin and glucagon maintain blood glucose balance.

Gonads

Testes:
Testes are the male reproductive glands. They secrete the male hormone
testosterone. Testosterone develops male secondary sexual characteristics such as:
• Deep voice  
• Beard and mustache  
• Development of muscles  

Ovaries:
Ovaries are the female reproductive glands. They secrete two hormones:

(i) Estrogen  
(ii) Progesterone  

Estrogen develops female secondary sexual characteristics. Progesterone maintains
pregnancy.

Pineal Gland

The pineal gland is located in the brain. It secretes melatonin.

Melatonin:
• Controls sleep-wake cycle  
• Influences reproductive functions  
• Secreted more during darkness  

Thymus Gland

The thymus gland lies in the upper chest region behind the sternum. It is large in
children but shrinks after puberty.

It secretes thymosin.

Functions of Thymosin:
• Helps in the development of T-lymphocytes  
• Strengthens immune system  

Disorders of the Endocrine System

1. Diabetes Mellitus:
Caused by deficiency of insulin.
• Symptoms: Excessive urination, thirst, weakness, high blood glucose.  
• Treatment: Insulin injections, controlled diet.

2. Goiter:
Caused by iodine deficiency.
• Thyroid gland becomes enlarged.  
• Prevented by using iodized salt.

3. Dwarfism:
Caused by deficiency of growth hormone in childhood.
• Results in very small height.

4. Gigantism:
Caused by excess growth hormone during childhood.
• Results in abnormally large height.


5. Acromegaly:
Caused by excess growth hormone in adults.
• Bones of hands, feet and face thicken.
• Body becomes disproportioned.

6. Cretinism:
Caused by deficiency of thyroid hormones in infants.
• Stunted growth  
• Mental retardation  
• Thick skin and protruding tongue  

7. Myxedema:
Caused by deficiency of thyroid hormones in adults.
• Slow heart rate  
• Low body temperature  
• Weight gain  
• Mental sluggishness  

8. Hyperthyroidism:
Caused by excessive secretion of thyroid hormones.
• Increased heartbeat  
• Weight loss  
• Nervousness  
• Bulging of eyes (exophthalmia)


Coordination Between Nervous and Endocrine Systems

Both systems work together to maintain homeostasis.

• The nervous system provides rapid, short-term responses.
• The endocrine system provides slow but long-lasting effects.
• Many endocrine glands are controlled by the hypothalamus.
• The hypothalamus links the nervous system with the endocrine system through the
pituitary gland.

Examples of Coordination:

1. Stress Response:
• During stress, hypothalamus stimulates adrenal medulla.
• Adrenaline is released.
• Heartbeat increases, breathing becomes faster, energy level rises.

2. Blood Glucose Regulation:
• Nervous system detects low blood sugar.
• Signals pancreas to release glucagon.
• Blood glucose rises to normal level.

3. Water Balance:
• Hypothalamus detects water level in blood.
• Releases ADH through posterior pituitary.
• Kidneys reabsorb more water.

Importance of Coordination:

• Maintains stable internal environment.
• Regulates growth and development.
• Controls metabolism.
• Helps body respond to changes.








