EVOLUTION

EVOLUTION -

Questions of origins of earth and life on it have been on the minds of humans
since prehistoric times. Many of us are also concerned with questions of origin: How old
is the planet earth? How long has life been on earth? How did life arise on earth? How
did a certain animal species come into existence? Answers for these questions come from
scientific inquiry. In this chapter we will study some aspects of organic evolution.
Evolution refers to the processes that have transformed life on earth from its
earliest forms to the vast diversity that we observe today. Evolutionary change is based
mainly on the interactions between populations of organisms and their environments.
Whenever we say or hear the word evolution, the name of Darwin comes to our mind
immediately. In fact, he was the first person who argued from evidence that species
were not specially created in their present forms; rather they had evolved from ancestral
species. He also proposed a mechanism for evolution, which he termed natural
selection.

CONCEPT OF EVOLUTION VS SPECIAL CREATION
In a bid to explain the cause of diversity of life and interrelationship among
living organisms, two schools of thought emerged in the earlier 19th century. Creationists
believed in the Theory of Special Creation, whereas evolutionists believed in the
Theory of Natural Selection. According to the theory of special creation, all living things
came into existence in their present forms especially and specifically created by Nature.
Among the scientists who believed in divine creation was Carolus Linnaeus (1707–1778).
The idea that organisms might evolve through time, with one type of organism
giving rise to another type of organism, is an ancient one, existing from the days of
Aristotle. Aristotle recognized that organisms ranged from relatively simple to very
complex structures. However, the present day concept of evolution is based on a known
historical context (Table 24.1).

Table 24.1: Darwinism in historical context.

Malthus | 1766–1834 | Published Essay on the Principle of Population.
Cuvier | 1769–1832 | Contributed aspects to paleontology and explained Earth's history by catastrophism.
Lamarck | 1744–1829 | Published ideas on the inheritance of acquired characters.
Darwin | 1809–1882 | 1. Voyage of the Beagle.
2. Began his investigations into evolution.
3. Wrote his major work, "On the Origin of Species".
Weismann | 1834–1914 | Published papers on selection.

This text discusses some details of the work and ideas of these men. Linnaeus in the eighteenth century grouped species into the same genus and similar groups. But as time
passed, it was observed that species were not common static entities. Linnaeus became a focal point in later systematic studies.

EVOLUTION FROM PROKARYOTES TO EUKARYOTES

Speculations aiming to explain the emergence of life favor certain ideas. In underwater hot springs simple chemical reactions may have provided raw materials and energy for early life forms. A group of bacteria, called archaebacteria, that live in extreme environments appear to have undergone less evolutionary change than other living groups.

Photosynthetic organisms probably freed living organisms from a dwindling source of free hydrogen. The first photosynthetic organisms probably used hydrogen sulfide as a source of hydrogen for reducing carbon dioxide to sugars. Later, water served this same purpose, and oxygen liberated by photosynthetic reactions began to accumulate in the atmosphere. Earth and its atmosphere slowly began to change. Ozone in the upper atmosphere began to block ultraviolet radiation from the sun; the reducing atmosphere slowly became an oxidizing atmosphere, and at least some living organisms began to utilize oxygen. About 420 million years ago, enough protective ozone had formed, making life in the terrestrial environment more feasible. Ironically, the change from a reducing atmosphere to an oxidizing atmosphere also meant that life could no longer arise abiotically. The first cells were most likely very simple prokaryotic forms. The prokaryotes may have arisen many billions of years ago.

Eukaryotes are thought to have first appeared about 1.5 billion years ago. The eukaryotic
cell might have evolved when a large anaerobic (living without oxygen) amoeboid
prokaryote ingested small aerobic (living with oxygen) bacteria and stabilized them,
instead of digesting them. This idea is known as the endosymbiont hypothesis
(Fig. 24.1a) and was first proposed by Lynn Margulis. According to this hypothesis, the
aerobic bacteria developed into mitochondria, which are the sites of aerobic respiration
and most energy conversion in eukaryote cells. The possession of these mitochondria-
like endosymbionts brought the advantage of aerobic respiration to the host.

Flagella (whiplike structures) may have arisen through the ingestion of
prokaryotes similar to spiral-shaped bacteria called spirochetes. Ingestion of prokaryotes
that resembled present-day cyanobacteria could have led to the endosymbiotic
development of chloroplasts in plants.

Another hypothesis for the evolution of eukaryotic cells proposes that the
prokaryotic cell membrane invaginated (folded inward) to enclose copies of its genetic
material (Fig. 24.1b). This invagination resulted in the formation of several double-
membrane-bound entities (organelles) in a single cell. These entities could then have
evolved into the eukaryotic mitochondrion, nucleus, chloroplast etc.

Whatever the exact mechanism for the evolution of the eukaryotic cell might be,
the formation of the eukaryotic cell led to a dramatic increase in the complexity and
diversity of life-forms on the earth. At first, these newly formed eukaryotic cells existed
only by themselves. Later, however, some probably evolved into multicellular organisms
in which various cells became specialized into tissues, which, in turn, formed organs for
many different functions. These multicellular forms then adapted themselves to life in a
great variety of environments.

INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS

Toward the end of the eighteenth century, several naturalists suggested that life
had evolved along with the evolution of earth. But only one of Darwin's predecessors
developed a comprehensive model that attempted to explain how life evolves. Jean
Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829) published his theory of evolution in 1809, the year
Darwin was born. Lamarck was in charge of the invertebrate collection at the Natural History
Museum in Paris. He presented a mechanism to explain how specific adaptations evolve.
Lamarck argued that those parts of the body used extensively to cope with the
environment become larger and stronger, while those that are not used deteriorate.
Among the examples Lamarck cited were the blacksmith developing a bigger bicep in the
arm that works the hammer and the giraffe stretching its neck to new lengths in pursuit of
leaves to eat. The second idea Lamarck adopted was called the inheritance of acquired
characteristics. In this concept of heredity, the modifications an organism acquires
during its lifetime can be passed along to its offspring, e.g., the long neck of the giraffe,
Lamarck reasoned, evolved gradually as the cumulative product of a great many
generations of ancestors stretching higher and higher. However, now we know that
acquired characteristics cannot be inherited.

Charles Darwin

Charles Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, in western England, in 1809. He joined
the expedition on the Beagle to the South American coastline. He observed and collected
thousands of specimens of diverse fauna and flora of South America. He noticed that
the fauna and flora of the different regions of the continent had a definite South American
stamp, very distinct from the life forms of Europe. Furthermore, the South American
fossils that Darwin found, though clearly different from modern species, were distinctly
South American in their resemblance to the living plants and animals of that continent. A
particularly puzzling case of geographical distribution was the fauna of the Galapagos
Islands. Most of the animal species on the Galapagos live nowhere else in the world,
although they resemble species living on the South American mainland. It was as if
the islands were colonized by plants and animals that strayed from the South American
mainland and then diversified on the different islands. Among the birds Darwin collected
on the Galapagos were 13 types of finches that, although distinct species, were
different adaptations of a common ancestral finch. Some species were restricted to individual islands, while others were
distributed on two or more islands that were close together.

After returning to Great Britain, Darwin studied species and adaptations as closely as
he could, comparing them with ancestral forms and considering how gradual accumulation of changes,
separated from original habitats by isolation, could cause populations to become distinct.
This was apparently what happened to the Galapagos finches.

By the early 1840s, Darwin had worked out the major features of his theory of
natural selection as the mechanism of evolution. In 1844, Darwin wrote a long essay on
the origin of species and natural selection. But before it could be published Alfred
Wallace, a young naturalist working in the East Indies, developed a theory of natural
selection essentially identical to Darwin’s. Wallace's paper, along with extracts from
Darwin's unpublished 1844 essay, were presented to the Linnaean Society of London on
July 1, 1858. Darwin quickly finished The Origin of Species and published it the next
year. In this book Darwin developed two main points:

Descent with Modification: Darwin believed in a perceived unity in life, with all
organisms related through descent from some common ancestor that lived in the remote
past. In the Darwinian view, the history of life is like a tree, with multiple branching and
rebranching from a common trunk all the way to the tips of the living twigs, symbolic of
the current diversity of organisms. At each fork of the evolutionary tree is an ancestor
common to all lines of evolution branching from that fork.

Natural Selection and Adaptation: Darwin suggested that populations of
individual species become better adapted to their local environments through natural
selection. Darwin’s theory of natural selection was based on the following observations.

(a) Production of more individuals than the environment can support leads to a
struggle for existence among individuals of a population, with only a fraction of
offspring surviving each generation.

(b) Survival in the struggle for existence is not random, but depends in part on the
hereditary constitution of the surviving individuals. Those individuals whose
inherited characteristics fit them best to their environment are likely to leave
more offspring than the less fit individuals.

This unequal ability of individuals to survive and reproduce will lead to a gradual
change in a population, with favourable characteristics accumulating over the
generations, thus leading to the evolution of a new species.

The Modern Synthesis: The modern evolutionary synthesis integrated Mendelian genetics with Darwinian natural selection. This synthesis emphasized the extensive genetic variation within populations and the importance of quantitative characters. With progress in population genetics, Mendelism and Darwinism were reconciled, and the genetic basis of natural selection was worked out. Thus, a comprehensive theory, the modern synthesis or Neo-Darwinism, was developed because it integrated discoveries and ideas from fields including paleontology, taxonomy, biogeography, and more.

Evidences of Evolution

Evolution leaves observable signs. Darwin's theory of evolution was mainly based
on the evidence from the geographical distribution of species and from the fossil record.
However, as biology progressed, new discoveries continue to validate the evolutionary view of life. Let us discuss now some of the evidences.

Biogeography: It was the geographical distribution of species — biogeography — that
first suggested the idea of evolution to Darwin. Islands have many species of plants and
animals that are endemic but closely related to species of the nearest mainland or
neighboring island. Consider armadillos, the armored mammals that live only in South
America. The evolutionary view of biogeography predicts that contemporary armadillos
are modified descendants of earlier species that occupied these continents, and the fossil
record confirms that such ancestors existed.

The Fossil Record: The succession of fossil forms is strong evidence in favour of
evolution. It provides a visual record in a series showing the evolution of an
organism. For instance, evidence from biochemistry, molecular biology, and cell biology
places prokaryotes as the ancestors of all life, and predicts that bacteria should precede all
eukaryotic life in the fossil record. Indeed, the oldest known fossils are prokaryotes.
Another example is the chronological appearance of the different classes of vertebrate animals in the fossil record:
fossil fishes, the earliest vertebrates, with amphibians next, followed by reptiles,
then mammals and birds. This sequence is consistent with the history of vertebrate
descent. The evolution of horse provides an example of such a history. Fossils are either the actual remains or traces of organisms that lived in ancient
geological times. The organism may be embedded in sand, resin or ice, or an
impression or cast is made of the body parts, the tissue being replaced or
petrified by silica or calcium carbonate minerals. Most fossils are found in
sedimentary rocks.

Comparative Anatomy: Anatomical similarities between species grouped in the
same taxonomic category bring another support to the theory of descent with modification.
For example, the same skeletal elements make up the forelimbs of humans,
cats, whales, bats, and all other mammals, although these appendages have very different
functions. The basic similarity of these forelimbs is the consequence of the descent of all
from a common ancestor. Homologous organs are structurally similar but functionally different — wings, flippers, and forelegs of different mammals are variations on a common anatomical theme that has been modified for divergent functions. Analogous organs are functionally alike but structurally different (e.g., wings of bats, birds and insects).

Similarity in characteristics resulting from common ancestry is known as homology,
and such anatomical signs of evolution are called homologous structures. Vestigial organs are rudimentary structures of marginal, if any, use to the organism. Vestigial organs are historical remnants of structures that had important functions in ancestors but are no longer essential presently. For instance, the skeletons of whales and some snakes retain vestiges of the pelvis and leg bones of walking ancestors (Fig. 24.2). The vermiform appendix in carnivores, ear muscles in man, etc., are other examples of vestigial structures.

Comparative Embryology: Closely related organisms go through similar stages in their
embryonic development. For example, all vertebrate embryos go through a stage in which
they have gill pouches on the sides of their throats. At an early embryonic stage of development,
similarities between fishes, frogs, snakes, birds, humans, and all other vertebrates are
more apparent than differences (Fig. 24.3). As development progresses, the various
vertebrates diverge more and more, taking on the distinctive characteristics of their classes. For example, the gill pouches develop into gills in fishes; in terrestrial vertebrates,
embryonic structures become modified for other functions, such as the eustachian tube in mammals. Comparing fully developed forms thus obscures their common origin, while embryology often reveals it.

NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL SELECTION

Natural selection arises from the interaction between organisms and their environment.
Darwin found evidence in nature: domestication and breeding show that selection
can produce marked changes in a relatively short period of time. Artificial selection by breeders can produce desired changes in populations by selecting for certain traits. Natural selection acts similarly but is driven by environmental pressures rather than human choice.

Genetic Variation and Population Genetics

Genetic variation in populations is fundamental to evolution. A gene pool consists of all the alleles for all the genes in a population. An individual may be homozygous or heterozygous for a given gene. If all members of a population are homozygous for the same allele, that allele is said to be fixed in the gene pool. More often, there are two or more alleles for a gene, each having relative frequency (proportion) in the gene pool. Consider an example: a wildflower population with two varieties contrasting in flower color. An allele for pink flowers, symbolized by A, is completely dominant over an allele for white flowers, symbolized by a. Suppose these are the only two alleles for this locus in the population. Our imaginary population has 500 plants. Twenty have white flowers because they are homozygous for the recessive allele; their genotype is aa. Of the 480 plants with pink flowers, 320 are homozygous (AA) and 160 are heterozygous (Aa). Since these are diploid organisms, there are a total of 1000 copies of genes for flower color in the
population. The dominant allele accounts for 800 of these genes (320×2 = 640 for AA
plants, plus 160×1 = 160 for Aa individuals).

Thus, the frequency of the A allele in the gene pool of this population is 80%, or 0.8.
And since there are only two allelic forms of the gene, the a allele must have a frequency
of 20%, or 0.2. Related to these allele frequencies are the frequencies of genotypes.
In our model wildflower population, these frequencies are: AA = 0.64 (64%) (320 out of 500 plants), Aa = 0.32 (160/500), and aa = 0.04 (20/500).
0.64 + 0.32 + 0.04 = 1.

Hardy-Weinberg Theorem
The frequencies of alleles and genotypes in a non-evolving population are described by the Hardy-Weinberg theorem. The theorem, named for the two scientists who derived the principle in 1908, states that the relative frequencies of alleles and genotypes in a population’s gene pool remain constant over generations unless acted upon by agents other than sexual recombination. Sexual recombination alone will not alter the relative frequencies of alleles or genotypes. (p = frequency of A; q = frequency of a).

For a gene locus where only two alleles occur in a population, population
geneticists use the letter p to represent the frequency of one allele and the letter q to
represent the frequency of the other allele. In the imaginary wildflower population, p = 0.8
and q = 0.2. Note that p + q = 1; the combined frequencies of all possible alleles must
account for 100% of the genes for that locus in the population. If there are only two
alleles and we know the frequency of one, the frequency of the other can be calculated:
1 − p = q, or 1 − q = p.

When gametes combine their alleles to form zygotes, the probability of
generating an AA genotype is p². In the wildflower population, p = 0.8, and p² = 0.64, the
probability of an A sperm fertilizing an A ovum to produce an AA zygote. The frequency
of individuals homozygous for the other allele (aa) is q², or 0.2 × 0.2 = 0.04 for the
wildflower population. There are two ways in which an Aa genotype can arise, depending
on which parent contributes the dominant allele. Therefore, the frequency of
heterozygous individuals in the population is 2pq (2 × 0.8 × 0.2 = 0.32, in our example). If
we have calculated the frequencies of all possible genotypes correctly, they should add up
to 1:
p² + 2pq + q² = 1.

Factors affecting gene frequency
Many factors can alter gene frequency. Out of these, five affect the proportion of
homozygotes and heterozygotes enough to produce significant deviations from the
proportions predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg principle. They are listed below.

Mutation: The ultimate source of all changes in alleles. Mutations introduce new alleles into a gene pool, though rarely will a single mutation alone cause large evolutionary change.

Migration: A very potent agent of change is migration (gene flow) — the movement of members from one population to another. Immigration of individuals into a population introduces new alleles into the gene pool.

Genetic Drift: Genetic drift is the change in allele frequencies due to random sampling effects, especially in small populations.

Non-random mating: Inbreeding is the most common form; it does not alter allele
frequency, but lessens the proportion of heterozygote individuals. Individuals with certain genotypes sometimes mate with one another more commonly than would be expected on a random basis. This causes the frequencies of particular genotypes to differ greatly from those predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg principle.

Selection: Some individuals leave behind more progeny than others, and the
rate at which they do so is affected by their inherited characteristics. This is called selection. Selection can be artificial selection or natural selection. In artificial selection, breeders select for desired characters. In natural selection, the environment plays this role, thus affecting the proportions of genes in a population.

ENDANGERED SPECIES

Extinction has been the fate of most plant and animal species. It is a natural
process that will continue. In recent years, however, the threat to the welfare of wild
plants and animals has increased dramatically—mostly as a result of habitat destruction.
Tropical rain forests, the most threatened areas on the earth, have been reduced to 44% of
their original extent. In certain areas, such as Ecuador, forest coverage has been reduced
by 95%. This decrease in habitat has resulted in tens of thousands of extinctions.
Accurately estimating the number of extinctions is impossible in areas like rain forests,
where taxonomists have not even described most species. We are losing species that we
do not know exist and we are losing resources that could lead to new medicines, foods,
and textiles. Other causes of extinction include climate change, pollution, and invasions
from foreign species. Habitats other than rain forest—grasslands, marshes, deserts, and
coral reefs—are also being seriously threatened.

An endangered species is in imminent danger of extinction throughout its range
(where it lives). A threatened species is likely to become endangered in the near future.
Preserving a species requires more than preserving a few remnant individuals. It
requires preservation of genes within species groups to promote species survival in
changing environments. This genetic diversity requires large populations of plants and
animals. Preservation of endangered species depends on a multifaceted conservation plan:

National parks to protect large tracts of land and wildlife habitats that allow movement between natural areas.

Multiple-use areas that allow controlled private activity while maintaining wildlife habitat.

Zoos and botanical gardens to save species whose extinction is imminent.

In Pakistan, Cheetah, Tiger, Asian lion, Indian rhino, Cheer pheasant, Crocodile and
Gharial have been declared extinct (locally). Meanwhile, Indus dolphin, Blackbuck, Common peafowl,
Great Indian bustard, Houbara bustard, White-headed duck and Marbled teal are among
the animals near extinction.
Deserts, sub-mountainous tracts and wetlands are habitats in peril. We must
protect them rapidly. Endangered species of plants have been recorded to more than 500.