GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

; -_
Bees - “- 7 yerTeU fe een - ots iik% 64 oe . CHS. > % 5 > , ;
pees = OOSP' BID hss HY Poy 5 7
1 CN: ESD ges “And everything We have created pairs; that ye may receive instruction.”
(Al-Quran 51:49)

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

In the course of its life cycle an organism changes from a fertilized egg into an
adult. As development proceeds, all sorts of changes take place. The most obvious
change is growth. The progressive changes which are undergone before an organism
acquires its adult form constitute embryonic development. Growth is the permanent
and irreversible increase in size that occurs as an organism matures.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN PLANTS

In plants growth and development involve cell division, elongation and
differentiation of cells into tissues and then organs. Growth is an irreversible increase in
size and development is a programmed series of stages from a simpler to more complex
form. As development proceeds, cellular differentiation of structure and function takes
place.

A plant has a growth pattern called open growth. Throughout life, the plant adds
new organs such as branches, leaves and roots, enlarging from the tips of roots and shoots,
but the rate of growth is not uniform throughout the plant body. At the beginning, the
growth is slow, but gradually it becomes rapid, attains a maximum, then gradually slows
down. In vascular plants, growth occurs through the activity of meristems. Meristems are
young tissues or group of cells that retain the potential to divide. In lower plants, the
entire plant body is capable of growing, but in higher plants, the entire plant body is not
capable of growing; growth is limited to certain regions known as growing
points. These growing points consist of groups of cells which are capable of division;
these growing points are called meristems. These meristematic cells are located at the
stem and root and they are of the following types:

(i) Apical Meristems
The apical meristems are found at the tips of roots and shoots and are primarily
concerned with the extension of plant body. These are perpetual growth zones found at
the apices of roots and stems. They are responsible for increase in the number of cells at
the tips of roots and stem, so they play important role in primary growth.

(ii) Intercalary Meristems
These are the parts of apical meristem which get separated from apex by
permanent tissues. They are situated at the bases of internodes in many plants. They play
an important role in the production of leaves and flowers. These are of temporary nature.

(iii) Lateral Meristems
Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells. They are present in dicots and
gymnosperms. Vascular and cork cambium are examples of lateral meristem. They
play an important role in the increase in diameter of stem and root and in secondary
growth. Some organs are determinate i.e. they grow to certain size and then stop e.g. leaves, flowers
and fruits; while others are indeterminate i.e. they grow by meristems that continually
replenish themselves, remaining youthful e.g. vegetative root and stem.

Types of Growth: Growth is of two types.
(i) Primary Growth: Primary tissue is added by the apical meristem.
(ii) Secondary Growth: Secondary tissue is added by the intercalary or vascular
cambium leading to increase in thickness.

Phases of Growth: Growth of multicellular plant is divided into four phases:
division, elongation, maturation and differentiation.

During cell division, the number of cells increase by mitosis. It occurs at the
tips of root and shoot where cells are small, have spherical nuclei lying in the center of
cytoplasm, which is non-vacuolated. As a result of cell division, each daughter cell
proceeds to enlarge. Synthesis of cytoplasm and cell wall material also takes place in this
phase.

At some distance from apex of root and shoot lies the zone of elongation and cells
increase many millimeters in length. During elongation the cell volume increases up to
many times the original size, parts of the cell wall increase and wall pressure rises.

During maturation, the final mean size of a given type of a cell is attained.
The cells which develop into pith, cortex and certain other tissues do not elongate
further along the axis, while other cells like fibres and tracheids elongate lengthwise more
than in other directions.

When the cell enlargement ceases, the process of differentiation starts. During this
growth phase the walls of cells become thicker; thickening appears on the walls of xylem
vessels, cells of various tissues differ in spatial dimensions and many new structural
features develop.

Conditions of Growth
The growth rate is influenced by a number of factors both external and internal.
External factors are temperature, light, oxygen, carbon dioxide, water, nutrition etc.
while internal factors are hormones, vitamins etc.

(A) External factors
(i) Temperature: Temperature influences the rate of growth within a certain
range (0–35°C). Normally rate of growth increases with rise of temperature and
decreases with decrease in temperature. For maximum growth, the optimum
temperature is 25–30°C and it is least at 5–10°C. But at a very high temperature
(35–40°C), the rate of growth stops and the plant may die.

(ii) Light: Light plays a very important role in the growth of plants. By light, we
mean the fractions of light which is absorbed by plant during photosynthesis.
Generally, light influences growth in three ways: intensity, quality and duration.
The increase in intensity of light increases the number of cell divisions.
Red light favours elongation of cells and blue light enhances cell division but
retards cell enlargement. Similarly, ultraviolet rays also retard cell elongation.
Duration of light affects the growth of vegetative and reproductive structures. It
also plays a role in inducing or suppressing flowering. The phenomenon is
termed photoperiodism.

(iii) Oxygen: For successful growth, regular supply of oxygen is necessary. Without
oxygen, no metabolic activity is possible and no growth takes place. A very high
supply of oxygen however, inhibits growth.

(iv) Carbon Dioxide: Carbon dioxide is essential for carrying out normal
process of photosynthesis but a very high concentration of it can retard growth.

(v) Water: By absorbing water, the cells elongate. The plant growth ceases in the
absence of water.

(vi) Nutrition: Nutrients supply energy to growing plants. With the increase in
nutrition, growth increases, whereas decrease in nutrition causes retardation of
growth.

(B) Internal Factors
(i) Hormones: Plant hormones also influence growth e.g. Indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA) causes elongation of cells.

(ii) Vitamins: Vitamins are organic compounds synthesized within the plant
bodies in the presence of light. If the plants are grown in dark, vitamin
deficiencies are induced and growth of plant body ceases.

Growth and differentiation in plants involves coordinated activity of meristems
leading to formation of tissues such as xylem and phloem, leaf primordia, lateral shoots
and roots. (Graphic representation of growth and differentiation in plants.)

As you have studied, once a seed has germinated, the plant’s further development
depends on the activities of the meristematic tissues, and we know that shoot and root
apical meristems give rise to all cells of the adult plant. Differentiation is the formation of
specialized tissues which can be considered to occur in plant in five stages.

Stage 1: Formation of embryo.
Stage 2: Shoot and root apical meristems are recognized.
Stage 3: Cambium is recognized; it is responsible for secondary growth.
Stage 4: There is production of leaf primordia (cells committed to become
leaves, shoots or roots). Root primordia develop from the root-cambium, called pericycle.
Leaf and shoot primordia develop directly from apical meristematic cells.
Stage 5: Fully differentiated tissues and structures are formed including xylem, phloem,
leaves, shoots and roots.

Growth Correlations
The development of a plant is usually correlated with its growth and different
organs growing at different rates in different directions and the development of different
parts takes place. Such reciprocal relationship is known as correlation.

One of the most important correlative effects in plants is apical dominance. In
many plants, only apical bud grows while growth is suppressed in lower axillary buds. In
an experiment, when apical bud was removed, the growth in the lower buds was
promoted. So active shoot apex controls the development of lateral buds. Thus, the auxin
of the terminal bud is responsible for inhibiting the growth of lateral buds by a
phenomenon known as apical dominance. Later Thimann and Skoog in 1934
performed experiments and showed that apical dominance was caused by auxin diffusing
from the apical bud which inhibited the growth of lateral shoots. The removal of apex releases the lateral buds from apical dominance. This is called the compensatory effect.

Research has also indicated that not only auxin causes apical dominance;
cytokinins also play important role in apical dominance and in many cases if cytokinins are applied
directly on the inhibited bud, it allows lateral buds to be released from apical dominance.
It is also seen that those plants that have dense growth of lateral branches, have
very little apical dominance.

As far as practical application of apical dominance is concerned, it plays an important role in
tuber development, and the inhibition of sprouting of lateral buds (eyes) in potatoes by applying synthetic
auxin. In the later case, sprouting of eyes is prevented and storing period is increased from
one to three years.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN ANIMALS

Embryology is the study of growth and differentiation undergone by an organism
in the course of its development from a single fertilized egg into a highly complex and an
independent living being like its parents.

Development is an ordered sequence of irreversible steps, with each step setting
up the necessary conditions for the next step. Since all animals are somehow related
through the process of evolution, there are some similarities in their various forms of
development. Here, we will see a broad outline of the early stages of development. This
can be described in terms of several stages:

* Sperm and egg formation
* Fertilization: Egg and sperm fuse to form zygote
* Cleavage: Zygote divides, blastomeres are formed
* Gastrulation: Germ layers are formed
* Organogenesis: Body organs formed, cells interact and differentiate
* Growth: Organs increase in size, adult body develops

The development of chick has been taken as a basic scheme of development. It
provides the basis for understanding the early differentiation of the organ systems and the
process of body formation, which is common to all vertebrates.

Fertilization and Incubation: The chick egg (yolk) is surrounded by membranes; normally development starts as soon as the egg is laid and continues if appropriate temperature is provided. In incubating eggs artificially, incubators are usually regulated at temperatures between 36–38°C. At this temperature, the chick completes development and is hatched on the twenty-first day.

Cleavage: Immediately after fertilization, the egg undergoes a series of mitotic
divisions, called cleavage. In bird’s egg the process of cell division is confined to the
small disc of protoplasm lying on the surface of the yolk at the animal pole. This type of
cleavage is referred to as discoidal cleavage. The cleavage furrows start in the clear
cytoplasmic region. The first two cleavage planes are vertical while the third
runs horizontally parallel to the surface and thus cuts underneath the cytoplasm and
separates it from the yolk. The successive cleavages become irregular and number of
cells increase.

Morula: Cleavage results in the formation of a rounded closely packed mass of
blastomeres. This is morula; it consists of a disc-shaped mass of cells two or more layers
in thickness (blastoderm) lying close to the yolk. In the center of the blastoderm, the
cells are smaller and closely packed while those at the periphery are flattened and larger.

Blastula: The morula stage is short-lived and soon changes into blastula and is
characterized by the presence of a segmentation cavity or blastocoele. The discoidal cap of cells above the blastocoele is called blastoderm. The marginal area of the blastoderm in which the cells remain undetached from the yolk and closely adherent is the zone of junction.

Gastrulation: It is characterized by the movement and rearrangement of cells in the
embryo. During gastrulation, the blastoderm splits into two layers: an upper layer of cells called epiblast, and a lower layer of cells called hypoblast. The epiblast is mainly
presumptive ectoderm and mesoderm. The hypoblast is mainly presumptive
endoderm because hypoblast cells grow outward over the surface of the yolk, then
downward around it to form the endodermal lining of a yolk sac. At this stage, the central
cells of blastoderm can be separated from the yolk; under these central cells a pool of
fluid develops, raising them off the yolk and giving the area a translucent appearance — the area pellucida, while the peripheral part of the blastoderm where the cells lie
unseparated from the yolk is termed as area opaca.

The upper layer of the blastoderm consists of the presumptive mesoderm and ectoderm.

Notochord and Mesoderm Formation: In the chick, the mesodermal cells do not invaginate as in amphibians, but migrate medially and caudally from both sides and create a midline thickening called the primitive streak (which grows rapidly in length as more presumptive mesodermal cells continue to aggregate in the middle). All this results in the change of shape of blastoderm (it changes from circular to pear-shaped). The anterior end of the primitive streak is occupied by an aggregation — the primitive node or notochordal cells while the rest of cells are mesodermal cells. Thus primitive streak represents the dorsal and both lateral lips of blastopore.

The continuous migration of cells takes place between epiblast and hypoblast and
results in the formation of a groove along the whole length of primitive streak. This is
named as primitive groove, marked on either side by thickened margins, the primitive
ridges. At the cephalic end of primitive streak, closely packed cells form a local
thickening known as Hensen’s node. Hensen’s node marks the site of a special type of invagination.

Shortly after the primitive streak has been formed and the endoderm well
established, cells begin to push in from the region of Hensen’s node to form the rod-like
notochord in the midline beneath the ectoderm. In chick embryo of about 18 hours,
notochord is one of the prominent structural features. By about 18–20 hours, it is seen that ectoderm has spread and become organized into a coherent layer merging peripherally with the yolk and the marginal area where these germ layers merge with the underlying yolk is known as germ wall. The cavity between the yolk and the endoderm which has been called gastrocoele persists.

By later stages, dorsal mesoderm is formed and is organized into somites. Lateral
mesoderm splits into somatic and splanchnic layers forming body cavities and contributing to organ rudiments.

Neurulation: On the dorsal surface of gastrula, over the notochord, presumptive neural
ectoderm is present in the form of a band. As gastrula elongates, the band thickens to
form a neural plate. In chicks of 18 hours, neural plate is seen as a flat, thickened area
of ectoderm. In embryos of 21–22 hours, longitudinal folding has occurred, establishing
the neural groove in the mid dorsal line, on either side of neural folds. In 24-hour
embryos, the folding of neural plate is clearly visible. The embryo is now termed a
neurula. The anterior end of the neural groove is widest and forms the future brain while
the rest of portion forms the future spinal cord. The neural plate sinks and the neural
folds grow toward one another and meet in the middorsal line, fuse and convert the neural
groove into neural tube. At each end of neural tube, small openings called anterior and
posterior neuropores are seen, which close later on. With the formation of neural tube,
central nervous system forms and the cavity enclosed is known as neurocoel. This whole process is named neurulation.

Mechanisms of Development
We know that from a single-celled zygote, a multicellular individual is formed and
the zygote contains complete information in the form of genome which has come in the form
of chromosomes from the egg and sperm. During cleavage, zygote divides into many
cells; each cell has full set of chromosomes and gets complete instructions from the
parents. During differentiation however some genes remain active, while others switch
off. The importance of nucleus and cytoplasm during development is revealed from experiments.

1. In 1892, Hans Driesch took sea urchin egg at two-cell stage, shook it apart and
   separated it into two cells. Later on, it was seen that both half embryos developed
   into normal larvae. Driesch concluded that both these cells contained all the
   genetic information of the original zygote.

2. Another experiment was performed by Spemann. He took salamander zygote,
   and with the help of minute ligature of human hair divided the zygote into two
   equal halves. The nucleus was present in one half, but the other half had no
   nucleus. When development continued, it was seen that cleavage was completed in the half containing nucleus but the anucleate half did not divide. Eventually, when the nucleated side had reached a 16-cell stage, one of the cleavage nuclei crossed the narrow cytoplasmic bridge to the anucleate side. Immediately this side started dividing.

3. Spemann also separated two halves of an embryo; both of them contained nuclei.
   Both these halves developed into complete embryos. He also observed that from a 16-cell embryo even, if a single cell is separated, it contains a complete set of genes and can form a complete embryo.

Through a series of experiments, Spemann also observed that sometimes the nucleated half can develop into abnormal ball of cells. Later studies revealed that development depends on the position of gray crescent. Gray crescent is the pigment-free area that appears at the time of fertilization. In the half lacking gray crescent, no further development can take place.

From these experiments, Spemann made two conclusions:

1. All cells contain the same nuclear information.
2. In the gray crescent area, cytoplasm contains information essential for development.

This raised the question: if all cells contain same nuclear material, what causes the
cells to differentiate? There are two ways by which cells undergo differentiation and
become committed to particular fates:
(a) Cytoplasmic segregation of determinative molecules during cleavage.
(b) Interaction with neighboring cells (induction).

Role of Cytoplasm in Development
Different cytoplasmic components contain different morphogenetic determinants that are
responsible for cell differentiation. These determinants are present in blastomeres. The fertilized egg of an ascidian contains cytoplasm of different regions that is segregated into different blastomeres:

1. Clear cytoplasm: produces larval epidermis.
2. Yellow cytoplasm: gives rise to muscle cells.
3. Gray vegetal cytoplasm: gives rise to gut.
4. Grey equatorial cytoplasm: produces notochord and neural tube.

Role of Nucleus in Development
Most gene-controlled substances, which can easily be identified, are found in the
cytoplasm, and are probably produced in it. However, production of developmentally active substances by the nucleus itself or its immediate neighborhood is available in some cases. One such example is the multicellular alga, Acetabularia. It consists of a rhizoid attached to the ground, from which arises a long stalk with an umbrella-shaped cap at its top. On the basis of structure and shape of the cap, two species of Acetabularia have been identified; Acetabularia mediterranea, which has regular-shaped cap, and A. crenulata, which has irregular-shaped cap.

There is only a single nucleus, although they may attain the size of several
centimeters or more. Haemmerling showed that if the cap is removed, a new one is
regenerated. He cut off the nucleus-containing rhizome from an alga of one species (A. mediterranea) and grafted a similar piece containing the nucleus of another species (A. crenulata). When the cap was removed, it was seen that the new regenerated one had the characteristics of the species from which the nucleus came. It means that irrespective of the cytoplasm to which the regenerate was attached, the nucleus determined the structure of the cap. This indicates nuclear control of cap structure in two species of Acetabularia.

From all these experiments, it was concluded that both genes and cytoplasm play
important roles in development. Nucleus contains all the genes which determine the
characteristics of the individual, while cytoplasm plays the role of selecting genes.

Concept of Differentiation
A fertilized egg contains cytoplasmic components that are unequally distributed
within the egg. These different cytoplasmic components are believed to have
morphogenetic determinants that control the functioning of a specific cell type. This is
called differentiation. So zygote contains complete information for the development
of an individual but it is difficult to see how these cells differentiate. Spemann performed a series of experiments on amphibian embryo to understand differentiation.

He took out a piece of ectoderm from frog’s embryo and grew it in a separate dish.
The embryo from which the piece of ectoderm was removed, was unable to form a normal
nervous system but had a defective nervous system. Similarly, the isolated piece did not
develop any structure even though it was active and healthy. In another experiment, he
separated the mesoderm underlying ectoderm and folded the flap of ectoderm back to its
original piece. The frog did not develop any nervous system. So it was proved that
mesoderm had some effect on the ectoderm to stimulate the ectodermal cells to form
nervous system.

Embryonic Induction
The capacity of some cells to evoke a specific developmental response in others
is a widespread phenomenon in development. Work on embryonic induction was reported
by Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold in 1924. They took two embryos of salamander at
the gastrula stage and removed a piece of dorsal blastopore lip from one embryo, and
transplanted it into a ventral or lateral position of another salamander gastrula. It
invaginated and developed a notochord and somites. It also induced the second embryo opposite the graft to form neural tube and a complete nervous system where the dorsal blastopore lip was placed. The developing embryo had both the grafted tissue and induced host tissue. Later on, it was seen that only cells from the dorsal lip of the blastopore were capable of inducing a complete embryo. This area corresponds to the presumptive areas of notochord and somites and is the primary organizer — the Spemann organizer.

AGING
Aging is an inevitable process and despite all the efforts to inhibit or stop it, aging
process goes on. It can be defined as negative physiological changes in our body. We
identify the adult individual by the following signs of old age, all of them need not be
present e.g. loss of hair pigment, development of small pigmented areas in the skin of
face and arms, dryness and wrinkling of skin, loss of agility, increased weight due to fat,
poor vision and forgetfulness, general weakness and decreased body immunity.
Degeneration of organs and tissues may also take place e.g. in joints, arthritis arises from
the degeneration of cartilage; degeneration and disappearance of the elastic tissues in the
tunica media of the blood vessel results in arteriosclerosis, blood clotting in the coronary
arteries.

The exact process of aging is still unknown, but the following points are worth
consideration.

1. The cells of tissues have only a finite number of mitotic divisions and hence the
   cells may have reached their finite number by the time tissue or organ is fully
   grown. For example in the case of nervous system, mental activity and memory
   deteriorate and there are fewer nerve cells in old age.

2. Changes in intracellular substances take place during aging. For example, collagen
   acquires increased cross linkages in its protein molecules, while elastic tissues
   lose their elasticity with the passage of time. There is also hardening and loss of
   resilience in dense connective tissue and cartilage.

3. Spontaneous mutation may result in loss of cells and degeneration of tissues. The
   process of aging can be slowed down by better nutrition and improved living
   conditions e.g. regular meals, regular exercise, adequate sleep, abstinence from
   smoking and maintaining ideal weight can prolong life by, on average, several years.
   The present goal of gerontology is not necessarily to increase life span but to increase health span.

Regeneration
The ability to regain or recover the lost or injured part of the body is called
regeneration. In sponges due to simple organization sponges possess great power of
regeneration. These not only replace the parts lost during injury, but any piece of the
body is capable of growing into a complete sponge. The process, however, is very slow
and requires months or years for the complete development.

If lobster loses its pincer claw a new claw regenerates. If starfish breaks off
portions of their arms into pieces till the central disc is left, the central disc in almost all cases and also the arms in some cases are capable of developing into separate individuals. If head of earthworm is removed, a new head regenerates. Limb
regeneration has been studied mostly in salamanders of various ages. In these forms, the
limbs are readily regenerated throughout life, more rapidly when the amphibian is young
and small. Besides limb, other parts of the body also have considerable regenerative
capacity e.g. tail in the larva of amphibians and in lizards. For example, lizard can easily
discard its tail but tail can be regenerated.

Healing of fracture and repair of a skin wound are other examples of
regeneration.

In plants, regeneration is the basis of plant propagation. Almost any part or even
a very small fragment of a plant e.g. a piece of stem or leaf or even a single tissue cell
may develop into a full plant. A part of the stem with a few leaves may be taken from
many kinds of plants and when planted in soil form a complete plant.

Regeneration is the development and formation of the missing organ in an adult; during
their formation and development, same embryological processes are repeated as were in embryo:
(1) Retention of undifferentiated cells and
(2) Differentiation of cells.

In the process of regeneration, many of the various cell types which were present in the
missing part of the body are replaced by the differentiation of cells. In flatworms and planaria the unspecialized cells, neoblasts, which are always present in the body of the adult are mobilized and migrate to the site of amputation, where they differentiate into specialized cell types. In other organisms like salamanders or newts some of the differentiated tissue cell types in the stump decompress (dedifferentiate) and then proceed to redifferentiate into the required cell types.

Abnormal Development
Under unfavourable conditions, some of the body parts show abnormal development.
Teratology is the branch of biology which deals with these abnormal developments and causes for such developments. Anything which interferes with the normal process of development is a factor causing abnormalities.

The normal process of development is disturbed by abnormalities inherited from
parents, abnormalities due to chromosomes or genes, environmental factors or metabolic
defects.

Abnormalities inherited from parents occur through abnormal or defective gene(s).
Abnormality of development is also related to the presence of defective gene on sex
chromosomes e.g. in haemophilia only males suffer from this disease. It again depends
whether the gene is dominant or recessive, homozygous or heterozygous.

Chromosomal abnormalities result when one of the sex chromosomes (X or Y) is
missing or extra and these abnormalities lead to syndromes. Klinefelter’s Syndrome
(XXY) is an example of trisomy of the sex chromosome while Turner’s Syndrome (XO) is
the condition in which one of the sex chromosomes is missing. Another condition, XYY
leads to tallness, aggressiveness, mental defect and antisocial behavior. These
abnormalities arise during the formation of gametes, when these gametes unite to form
zygote.

Environmental factors causing or contributing to abnormal development are
grouped together as teratogens. Ionizing radiations (e.g. X-rays) are well known for their
teratogenic action because they often have their effect on the developing ovum or
spermatozoan, causing damage or changes (mutations) in the genes. Nutritional
deficiencies, absence of certain substances (e.g. vitamins and trace elements), toxins and
drugs even ingested by mother, affect the differentiation of every tissue in the foetus. If
such deficiency is severe, it may cause death of foetus.

Metabolic defects lead to structural deviations from the normal. During
organogenesis, when various body organs are formed, sometimes one organ or its part is
missing or it is repeated and it can result in abnormal organs or body parts and the
individuals born are malformed.

Examples of abnormalities include microcephaly where individuals are born with small skulls; cleft palate where the upper lip is split or the individual has harelip; and conditions where the number of fingers or toes in hands or feet are more or less than five.
