CONCEPTS IN HOMEOSTASIS

Each organism of a species has assumed, in evolutionary history, a specific set up
of internal environment at various levels of organization suitable to its surroundings i.e.,
external environment. External environment and its components fluctuate continuously,
however, the organism resists and manages these changes by making adjustments to keep
its own internal fluctuations within a narrow range thus protecting internal environment
from the harms of the fluctuations. The protection of internal environment from the
harms of fluctuations in external environment is termed as homeostasis. The homeostasis
keeps the internal fluctuations in a narrow range with various control systems compared
to wider external fluctuations.

Most susceptible components of internal environment that may be affected by
fluctuations in external environments are water, solutes and temperature. Also the
mechanism an organism has adapted to eliminate harmful nitrogenous wastes depends
upon the availability of water. The mechanism of homeostasis is the central
regulation, generally between organism and its requirement in the
environment, of solute and the gain and loss of water maintenance of an organism
is osmoregulation. The mechanism which eliminates
nitrogenous waste is referred as excretion, whereas
maintenance of internal temperature within a tolerable
range is designated as thermoregulation.
These contribute in
evolutionary process.

Likewise the control systems among intracellular and extracellular internal
environment of an organism also at cell level keep fluctuating in narrow range in
intracellular, within cell membrane, compared to in extracellular (vascular and other
interstitial fluids) environment. Here, in addition to solute and water various essential
metabolites, hormones etc. are kept in a required range. Homeostasis does not mean to
keep a fixed internal environment as changes maintained within a specific range are
necessary for normal body functions. For example, water availability may fluctuate
tremendously for the organisms in the external environment from abundant supply to
almost dry conditions, however, the quantity of water in the body i.e., internal
environment may vary in response to abundant supply and dry condition, but in a narrow
range. The control systems would not let the body be flooded with water in abundant supply
and also not to dehydrate in dry conditions. Furthermore, adaptation to lower level of
range in dry conditions and to higher level of range in abundant supply of water is good
for the organism to feel normal within internal fluctuations forced by drastic external
fluctuations.
and also not to dehydrate in dry conditions. Furthermore, adaptation to lower level of
range in dry conditions and to higher level of range in abundant supply of water is good
for the organism to feel normal within internal fluctuations forced by drastic external
fluctuations.

The control systems have been acquired for the variety of homeostatic
regulations. These living control systems work exactly on the mechanism of physical
control system. It has three components: receptor, control centre and an effector. In a
physical control system e.g. temperature control system, there is a sensor (thermometer)
that monitors temperature change from a set point and signals to control centre to take
action by switching on heater or cooling units in response to drop or rise in the
temperature compared to set point. Similar to it in living system there is set point in
temperature regulated (endothermic) animals. The receptors (sensor) detect temperature
change, e.g. of increase and signal to control centre for action of cooling systems and the
vice versa. Detection of change and signalling for effector’s response to control system is
a feedback mechanism. In these processes there is an inverse effector’s response to the
change in external environment as there is generally cooling effector’s response to
warmth sensing in external environment, thus are termed as negative feedback (Fig. 15.1).

External Environment
Fluctuations in wide range
Control
systems
Restrict
Fluctuations in narrow range
Cell
Intracellular environment
Extremely narrow fluctuations
Extracellular environment
Organism’s internal environment

Fig.15.1. Homeostasis: Controlling systems lower fluctuations in internal environments.

OSMOREGULATION
Water relations of cell
Water is the solvent of the solutes in the cell. Each cell has been adapted to a
defined quantity of water in relation to salts in it to perform its functions. Homeostatic
mechanisms generally maintain this concentration.
Balance of water and solutes in the body

Cells consistently encounter changing extracellular environment. It may be of
diluted solution compared to the cell concentration, thus designated as hypotonic
environment. The more concentrated external environment is termed as hypertonic and
that which resembles the internal solution is the isotonic.

The hypotonic environment osmotically causes entry of water into the cell and
renders the cell solutions diluted. The cell also becomes turgid. Thus it may be harmed
(Fig. 15.2a). The hypertonic environment, on the other hand, renders cell solutions
concentrated and shrinks the cell due to loss of water (Fig. 15.2c). To prevent these
situations cells osmoregulate themselves to keep water and salts balanced in plants and
animals.

Normal cell | Shrunken cell
Hypotonic | Isotonic | Hypertonic
(a) (b) (c)

Fig.15.2 Response of the cell to various external environments i.e. different concentrations of
solution. Without any regulation with control system at cell membrane, cell remains in
normal state despite differences in its internal to external environments.

Osmoregulation in Plants

Plants are distributed in different habitats of aquatic, moderate and severely dry
terrestrial nature, thus termed as hydrophytes, mesophytes and xerophytes, respectively.
Hydrophytes have the adaptations to remove the flooding of its cells in fresh water. In
this type the surface area of leaves is very large to transpire water excessively. Extensive
stomata are present on the upper surface facing the atmosphere to promote loss of water
(Fig. 15.3a).

Mesophytes have moderate water availability. In sufficient supply of water stomata are
kept open to promote loss of excess water, however, in restricted supply stomata close to
prevent the loss e.g. Brassica, rose, mango etc.

Xerophytes have the adaptations for reduced rate of transpiration. Many xerophytes
possess small, thick leaves to limit water loss by reducing surface area proportional to the
volume. Their cuticle is thick, waxy and leathery. Stomata are on lower surface of leaves
and located in depression. Some, as cacti, during the driest season, shed their leaves to
restrict transpiration completely, thus stems are the photosynthetic organs. In rainy
season, stem stores water for use in dry conditions (Fig.15.3b).

Fig.15.3a. A hydrophytic plant  Fig.15.3b. A xerophytic plant

Osmoregulation in Animals

Animal cells require more critical balance of water and solutes in the body as
they cannot survive a net water gain or loss. Water continuously leaves and enters the
cells; however, the quantity of the water and the solutes is kept in balance. There are two
approaches in maintaining this balance.

Animal body fluids are kept isotonic to the external environment even for marine
saltwater environment. These animals thus do not require actively to adjust their
internal osmotic state, so are known as osmoconformers.

The animals whose body fluid concentrations differ noticeably from the outside
environment actively regulate to discharge excess water in hypotonic and excrete
salts in hypertonic conditions, therefore, are called osmoregulators. Animals
inhabiting different environments have distinct adaptations to regulate osmotic
balance, e.g. marine, fresh water and terrestrial environments.

Osmoregulation in Different Environments

Marine: Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers. Among the vertebrates
hagfishes are isotonic with the surrounding sea water. Most cartilaginous fishes
maintain lower internal salt concentration than that of sea water. Their kidneys for
osmoregulation excrete salts through gills and also possess salt excreting organs such as
rectal glands. These employ active transport mechanism to remove salt against osmotic
gradient. Some fishes have relatively low salts in body fluids but have rendered these
hypertonic to that of sea water by retaining urea in adequate concentration. Because
urea in high concentration is damaging, these fishes retain another chemical
trimethylamine oxide for protection against urea. Bony fishes, the descendants of fresh
water ancestors but later became marine, constantly lose water from their hypotonic body
fluids to hypertonic environments. These fishes have adapted themselves to drink large
amount of sea water and excrete concentrated urine resulting in maximum
salt excretion and minimum water loss (Fig. 15.4a).

Fresh Water: Fresh water animals are constantly facing the osmotic flooding of body
fluids and loss of salts. Fresh water protozoa, Amoeba and Paramecium, pump out excess
water by structures called contractile vacuoles. Many fresh water animals including fishes
remove excess water by producing large volumes of very dilute urine. The loss of salts is
compensated by preference of salt-containing food and by active uptake of salts by gills
and skin (Fig. 15.4b).

Terrestrial: The evaporative loss of water leading to dehydration is the major problem
for terrestrial life. Arthropods and vertebrates have successfully adapted to terrestrial
mode of life. Terrestrial animals are covered by body surface which prevents loss of
water, as the waxy exoskeletons of insects and multi-layered dead, keratinized skin cells
of most terrestrial vertebrates. Drinking and eating moist foods compensate the loss of
water. These animals also have metabolic and behavioral adaptations. Some desert
mammals e.g. kangaroo rat survive without drinking water by feeding on seeds of desert
plants containing more carbohydrates which produce water of metabolism. Terrestrial
animals produce concentrated urine in their kidneys that reabsorb most filtered water in
the process of excretion. Terrestrial animals can tolerate dehydration and it differs in
various animals. This characteristic is known as anhydrobiosis.
Osmoregulation has enabled the animals
and plants to distribute themselves in wide
range of habitats.

(Fig 15.4a)

Passive loss of water
across body surface
through gills

Drinks
sea water

Salts actively
excreted by gills

Scanty amount of
urine contains some salts

(a) Marine fish

Passive gain of water
across body surface
and through gills

Does not
drink water

Large amount of
isotonic water taken up by gills

Large amount of
hypotonic urine
contains little salts

(b) Fresh water fish

Fig.15.4. Osmoregulation in: (a) Marine fish (b) Fresh water fish

Fresh Water: Fresh water animals are constantly facing the osmotic flooding of body
fluids and loss of salts. Fresh water protozoa, Amoeba and Paramecium pump out excess
water by structures contractile vacuoles. Many fresh water animals including fishes
remove excess water by producing large volumes of very dilute urine. The loss of salts is
compensated by preference of salt containing food and by active uptake of salts by gills
and skin (Fig. 15.4b).

Terrestrial: The evaporative loss of water leading to dehydration is the major problem
for terrestrial life. Arthropods and vertebrates have successfully adapted to terrestrial
mode of life. Terrestrial animals are covered by body surface, which prevents loss of
water as the waxy exoskeletons of insects and multi-layered dead, keratinized skin cells
of most terrestrial vertebrates. Drinking and eating moist foods compensate the loss of
water. These animals also have metabolic and behavioral adaptations. Some desert
mammals e.g. kangaroo rat survive without drinking water by feeding on seeds of desert
plants containing more carbohydrates, which produce water of metabolism. Terrestrial
animals produce concentrated urine in their kidneys that reabsorb most filtered water in the
process of excretion. Terrestrial animals can tolerate dehydration and it differs in various
animals. This characteristic is known as anhydrobiosis.

EXCRETION

Among the assimilated nutrients in animals, carbohydrates and lipids are
metabolized to CO₂ and H₂O. Proteins and nucleoproteins metabolism produces waste
nitrogen in various forms in different animals. The waste nitrogen proves toxic if it is
concentrated in the cell, therefore, it must be removed from the body. The elimination of
wasteful metabolites, mainly of the nitrogenous nature is called excretion.

In contrast, the mechanism of excretion in plants is different. Plants in their
autotrophic mode of life produce oxygen and in metabolism produce CO₂ and H₂O as the
excretory products. Plants also produce several organic and inorganic compounds which
are stored for various purposes and are also removed when necessary.

Excretion in Plants

All living things must undergo excretion. It is one of the essential properties of
life. In plants, oxygen could be looked upon as a waste product of photosynthesis; carbon
dioxide a waste product of respiration and water as the waste product of both. The
mechanisms of elimination of these gases are described in the respective chapters. Water
is lost through transpiration or just used for maintaining the turgor in the cells.

Plant cells have large vacuoles; these can be used for either storage of useful
compounds, or the storage of waste substances. These may accumulate at
concentrations that lead to crystal formation in the vacuoles. Plants produce certain
wastes of inorganic and organic nature, which are stored in certain organs. The leaves are
the prominent organs for this purpose. These leaves are destined to fall off, as is the case
of autumn leaves in plants or die off as happens in the leaves and stalk of certain bulbs
e.g. bluebell, leaving the bulb underground. This is the reason gardeners find rotted
autumn leaves a good source of minerals. The falling of yellow leaves in autumn is the
seasonal time for the plants to get rid of the accumulated wastes and because of this
reason leaves are said to be excretophore. According to an explanation the change in
color in these leaves is not due to removal of chlorophyll as the microscopic examination
of autumn leaves shows that leaves are loaded with pigmented compounds prior to falling
off and many toxic materials like heavy metals increase sharply as the yellowing
proceeds.

Some trees deposit strange chemicals in their branches and trunks, especially in
old xylem which is no longer used for water transport. This takes place in ebony which
produces very black wood in the center. These are considered to be waste materials by
plant physiologists.

Some plants will actively secrete waste compounds into the soil, occasionally
using them as chemical weapons against other competing plants e.g. conifers.

Excretion in Animals

Keeping in view the definition of excretion, as discussed earlier, that it is the
elimination of waste metabolites. Several products may be included in the list of
excretory products. Water due to its removal in hypo-osmotic environment is labelled as
excretory product in these specific conditions. Similarly, salts removed by animals of
hypertonic environment etc. Nitrogenous waste metabolites constitute the excretory
products.

Primarily, in the catabolism of amino acids the amino group (—NH₂) is released
(deamination) or transferred to another molecule for removal or reuse. Amino group not
reused for recycling of amino acids is essentially dissolved in water and excreted to avoid
toxic rise in the plasma. Elevated levels of these wastes can cause convulsions, coma and
eventually death. Mostly excess nitrogen is excreted by animals as ammonia, urea or
uric acid (Fig. 15.5). Lower quantities of nitrogen are excreted in the form of other
compounds such as creatinine, creatine or trimethylamine oxide and in very small
quantities as amino acids, purines and pyrimidines. Metabolism of purine and pyrimidine
bases produces significant amount of nitrogenous wastes of hypoxanthine, xanthine,
uric acid, allantoin, urea and ammonia.
Nature of Excretory Products in Relation to Habitats.

Ammonia is very toxic and dissolves quickly in body fluids. It must be
kept in low concentration in the body. To maintain its low concentration below that of
body requires large volume of water also to eliminate it in urine as it is produced. This is
possible in a hypotonic environment. Therefore, ammonia is kept as excretory product
of the animals inhabiting hypotonic (e.g. fresh water) environment.
About 500 ml water is needed to excrete 1 g of ammonia nitrogen.

In restricted supply of water, ammonia cannot be kept as excretory product, the
other alternative is to change it into less toxic substance such as urea. Urea requires only
50 ml of water for its 1 g of nitrogen removal. Here excretory nitrogen is metabolically
converted into urea by urea cycle (Fig.15.6) in the animals inhabiting environment with
restricted supply of water e.g. terrestrial mammals.

Citrulline ← Ornithine + CO₂ + Ammonia
(First nitrogen of urea)

Argininosuccinate → Arginine
(Second nitrogen of urea)

Urea Cycle

Arginine → Urea + Ornithine

Fig.15.6. Metabolic pathways in urea cycle

Animals inhabiting environment with acute shortage of water supply require an
excretory product which can be excreted with minimum amount of water. Only 10 ml water
is required to eliminate 1 g of nitrogen in the form of uric acid. Therefore the reptiles and
birds that inhabit arid environment excrete uric acid as excretory product. Animals
excreting ammonia, urea and uric acid are called as ammonotelic, ureotelic and
uricotelic respectively. Ureotely and uricotely are evolutionary adaptations of
nitrogenous waste in their habitats. Animals have adapted not only the chemical nature of
excretory products but also the various adaptations have been obtained to provide
diversity in excretory structures. The main representative models are described below:

EXCRETION IN REPRESENTATIVE ANIMALS

Excretion in Hydra

Hydra, a cnidarian, does not have specialized excretory structures. In it waste
droplets simply diffuse into the isosmotic surroundings.

Excretion in Planaria

Flatworms have simple tubular excretory system called as protonephridia. This
system is spread throughout the body and branches
are capped by a cellular setup termed as flame cell. Each flame cell has a tuft of
cilia, whose beating propels interstitial fluid into the tubular system (the beating of cilia
looks like a flickering flame, therefore these cells are termed flame cells). The tubular
system is drained into excretory ducts, which open to the exterior through several
nephridiopores (Fig.15.7).

Fresh water flatworms excrete very dilute urine. The parasitic flatworms, which
are isotonic to the host environment mainly function in disposing nitrogenous wastes.

Flame cells
Nucleus
Cilia (“flame”)
Protonephridial
network
Nephridiopores
Excretory duct

(a) Planaria
(b) Portion of excretory organ
(c) Single flame cell

Fig.15.7. Excretory system in Planaria

Excretion in Earthworm

Earthworm is an ideal example of another type of tubular excretory system
called as metanephridium. Each segment of earthworm has a pair of metanephridia.
This system has an internal ciliated opening, the nephrostome, immersed in
coelomic fluid and enveloped by a network of capillaries. Nephrostome
collects coelomic fluid. As fluid moves along the tubule, epithelium reabsorbs salt
from the lumen and sends it to blood vessels surrounding the nephridium. The leftover
appears as urine containing nitrogenous waste (Fig. 15.8).

Excretion in Cockroach

In terrestrial arthropods particularly in the insects, the excretory structures are
adapted to collect excretory products from hemolymph in sinuses through suspended
tubular structures called Malpighian tubules. These Malpighian tubules remove
nitrogenous waste from the hemolymph. These are the only excretory structures in animal
kingdom that are associated with digestive tract. The epithelial lining of the tubules
transports solutes including salts and nitrogenous waste from hemolymph into tubules
lumen. Fluid then passes to hind gut into the rectum. Rectum reabsorbs
most of the salts and water, thus nitrogenous wastes are excreted as solid excreta in the form
of uric acid crystals along the feces. This kind of adaptation in excretion is the success of
these animals on land with acute shortage of water (Fig. 15.9).

Fig. 15.9 Excretory system in insect

EXCRETION IN VERTEBRATES

The ancestors of vertebrates, the invertebrate chordates, have segmentally
arranged excretory structures throughout the body like the metanephridia in earthworm.
This character is well represented in the primitive vertebrate hagfishes which have
kidneys with segmentally arranged tubules. However, the contrasting developments
proceeded in evolution in other vertebrates with the appearance of kidneys. Kidneys
contain numerous tubules, not arranged segmentally, closely associated with dense
network of capillaries. The basic functional structure in the kidneys is nephron.
Excretion in Human

Normal Mechanism: Considering the chemical basis of life and its sustainability on
metabolic pathways, the generation of wastes is primarily done at metabolic level and
these are called metabolic wastes. These include urea, produced from the metabolism of
amino acids; creatinine, produced from muscle creatine; uric acid, from nucleic acids;
bilirubin, end products of haemoglobin breakdown and metabolites of various hormones.
Metabolic wastes also include the toxins produced within the body and ingested into the
body such as pesticides, drugs and food additives. The presence of wastes in the body
causes serious hazards, thus are eliminated by excretory system.

Excretory Organs

Liver and kidneys are the primary structure for eliminating waste products.
Liver is the central station of metabolism and consequently the body’s central
metabolic clearing house. Due to this characteristic, liver functions are pivotal to
homeostasis and involve interaction with most of body’s organ systems. Liver supports
the excretory role of the kidney by detoxifying many chemical poisons and produce
ammonia, urea and uric acids from the nitrogen of amino acids. Removal of salts with
water by the sweat glands and of sebum by sebaceous glands seems to be excretory in
nature. The removal of water and salts from sweat glands is for the purpose of
thermoregulation and of sebum on the skin is for protection against microorganisms.
Therefore in context of definition of excretion, skin may not be considered as an
excretory organ. Among the various nitrogenous wastes described earlier, urea is the
principal excretory product and liver forms it from the waste nitrogen. The metabolic
pathways involved in the production of urea are termed as urea cycle. Two
ammonia and one carbon dioxide molecules are shunted into the cycle to generate one
molecule of urea. One ammonia molecule combines with carbon dioxide and already
available precursor from previous cycle ornithine to form citrulline; subsequently
another ammonia combines to form arginine. The arginine is split by arginase to form
urea and the precursor ornithine for next cycle (Fig. 15.6).

Table 15.1. Major homeostatic functions of the liver

Synthesis:
• Nitrogenous wastes: NH₃, urea, uric acid — supports kidney in waste disposal
• Plasma proteins: prothrombin, fibrinogen, albumin etc. —
a) blood clotting, b) maintain osmotic balance of blood
• Emulsifier: bile salts — assist in small intestinal digestion of lipids
• Lipids: cholesterol, lipoproteins — regulate blood chemistry, store energy and help
maintain cell membranes

Storage:
• Iron — oxygenation of tissues as constituent of haemoglobin
• Glycogen

Conversion:
• Excess glucose in blood to glycogen, lactic acid to glycogen and stored glycogen to
glucose — energy storage and use

Recycling:
• Contents of old red blood cells (e.g. CO₂ and other constituents of haemoglobin) —
oxygenation of tissue

Detoxification:
• Many harmful chemicals (e.g. food additives, pesticides, drugs etc.) — assist kidney
in toxin disposal

Liver is not only involved in the synthesis of nitrogenous wastes to assist kidney in
their disposal, but also has numerous crucial functions of homeostasis importance. These
functions belong to synthesis, storage, conversion, recycling and detoxification categories
(Table 15.1).

Urea is detoxified form of
ammonia in urea cycle, which
can be retained in the body in
greater amounts than ammonia
and can be eliminated with ¹/₁₀
quantity of water as compared to
ammonia.

Urinary System

A pair of kidneys consists of millions of functional units, nephrons. The
nephrons have extensive blood supply via the renal arteries, which leave each kidney via
the renal vein. The function of kidney and blood in clearing wastes is very evident from
the fact that weight of kidneys accounts for less than 1% of the total body weight while
receiving 20% of blood supplied with each cardiac beat. Following filtration of blood and
further processing through tubular system, urine is collected in a central cavity of the
kidney, pelvis. Urine leaves the kidney through a duct ureter. The ureters of both the
kidneys drain into urinary bladder through ureteral orifice. Urine leaves the body,
during urination, from the bladder through a tube called the urethra, which empties near
the vagina in females or through the penis in males. Sphincter muscles near the junction
of the urethra and the bladder control the urine in bladder (Fig. 15.10).

(Figure text unchanged)

The functional units, nephrons, in human kidneys are
arranged along two
regions; an outer cortex and an inner medulla. The nephrons arranged along the
cortex are called cortical, however, those arranged along the border of cortex and
medulla with their tubular system looping deep in inner medulla are juxtamedullary
nephrons. These juxtamedullary nephrons are specifically instrumental in the production
of concentrated urine (Fig. 15.11).

In each nephron inner end forms a cup-shaped swelling, called Bowman’s
capsule and it is around a ball of capillaries called glomerulus. Glomerulus circulates
blood through capsule as it arrives through afferent arteriole and leaves the capsule by
efferent arteriole. The blood vessel subdivides again into
another network of capillaries,
the peritubular capillaries.
Bowman capsule continues as
an extensively convoluted proximal
tubule, loop of Henle and the
distal tubule, which empties into
collecting tubules. The
collecting tubules open into
pelvis. The filtrate from
glomerulus passes through these
structures and is processed
ultimately for urine formation.
The peritubular capillaries
intermingle with proximal and
distal tubules of the nephron. In
juxtamedullary nephrons
additional capillaries extend
down to form a loop of vessels,
vasa recta.

Filtration: Blood passing through glomerulus is filtered into Bowman’s capsule. It is
specifically filtered here, unlike at the other parts of the vessels, because glomerulus
walls are porous, and the fraction of the blood pressure reaching here provides the
filtration pressure. The filtrate appearing in Bowman’s capsule is called glomerular filtrate,
which contains numerous useful substances such as glucose, amino acids, salts etc. in
aqueous solution.

Reabsorption: All the useful constituents of the glomerular filtrate are reabsorbed in
proximal tubules and when filtrate leaves proximal tubules, it mostly contains
nitrogenous wastes.

Secretion: The tubular epithelium also secretes substances into the lumen. This secretion
is very selective and is mainly of hydrogen ions to balance pH value of the filtrate
passing through the tubule.

Concentration of Excretory Products
In restricted supply of water, the conservation of water is the principal function
of the body. This is done by concentration of the filtrate by counter current and hormonal
mechanisms. In the sufficient or excess supply of water, reabsorption of water from the
filtrate is reduced, specifically due to inhibition of release of antidiuretic hormone in the
presence of hypo-osmotic body fluids. The reduction in reabsorption causes large volumes
of diluted urine. Mammalian kidney including human is adapted to conserve water by
over 99.5% reabsorption of glomerular filtrate.

The interstitial fluid of the kidney is gradually concentrated from cortical to
medullary part, thus inner medulla is highly concentrated with the presence of urea and
through a mechanism of counter-current multiplier. This mechanism causes gradual
osmotic outflow of water from the filtrate back to kidney as it passes downward in the
descending loop of Henle. Furthermore, ascending loop of Henle does not allow outflow
of water from its filtrate, instead actively transports Na⁺ ions into kidney interstitium to
maintain its high concentration.

Hormones: The active uptake of sodium in the ascending limb or thick loop of Henle is
promoted by the action of aldosterone, the hormone secreted from adrenal cortex. The
other site in the nephron, where reabsorption of water takes place is collecting tubules.
ADH released from posterior pituitary lobe acts to actively transport water from filtrate in
collecting tubules back to kidney.

Kidney as Osmoregulatory Organ

The production of varied concentrations of urine depending on the availability of
water exhibits clearly that kidney functions as an osmoregulatory organ along its
excretory role of nitrogenous wastes.
Kidney Problems and Cures

Unusual situations may arise in the function of kidney by factors originating
within kidney or outside. These cause serious kidney diseases.

Kidney Stones: Stony materials are found in the kidney and these cause urinary
obstruction and are generally complicated by infections. These stones have specified
chemical nature. These are formed in metabolic disease, hypercalcemia i.e. high level of
circulating calcium in blood because of other diseases.
Hyperoxaluria i.e. higher blood level of oxalates is another contributing factor in the formation
of calcium oxalate stones. Oxalates are present in green vegetables and tomatoes therefore
may be the source of hyperoxaluria. The incidence of calcium oxalate type
stones is 70% of all the kidney stones. The incidence of other types of stones of calcium
phosphate and of uric acid is 15% and 10% respectively. These salts
are precipitated out during urine formation and accumulate later to form stone (Fig.15.13).

Lithotripsy: The kidney stones have been removed by kidney surgery. Presently
lithotripsy is used for non-surgical removal of kidney stone. It is the technique used to
break up stones that form in the kidney, ureter or gall bladder. There are several ways to
do it, although the most common is extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. High
concentrations of X-ray or ultrasound are directed from a machine outside the body to the
stone inside. The shock waves break the stone in tiny pieces or into sand, which are
passed out of the body in urine.

Renal Failure: Various factors of pathological and chemical nature may progressively
destroy the nephron, particularly its glomerular part. This results in increase in the
plasma level of urea and other nitrogenous wastes. The rise in urea causes complications
of increase in blood pressure and anemia etc.

Dialysis: In chronic renal failure, the function of the kidney is completely lost and is
unable to remove nitrogenous waste. To remove nitrogenous waste, particularly the urea,
the blood of the patient is treated through dialysis. It cleans the blood either by passing it
through an artificial kidney or by filtering it within the abdomen. The wastes and excess
water are removed during the treatment as is done by the healthy kidneys.

There are two types of dialysis: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Hemodialysis means “cleaning the blood”. In this procedure blood is circulated through a
machine which contains a dialyzer also called an artificial kidney. Dialyzer has two
spaces separated by thin membrane. Blood passes from one side of the membrane and
dialysis fluid on the other. The wastes and excess water pass from the blood through the
membrane into the dialysis fluid.

Peritoneal dialysis works on the same principle except that abdomen has a
peritoneal cavity, lined by a thin epithelium called peritoneum. Peritoneal cavity is
filled with dialysis fluid that enters the body through a catheter. Excess water and wastes
pass through the peritoneum into the dialysis fluid. This process is repeated several times
a day. Dialyzer is a kidney machine that works on the same principle as in a kidney
for removal of nitrogenous wastes and excess water from the blood. It is used after
kidney failure and dialysis is done again and again until a matching donor’s kidney is
available.

Kidney Transplant: Dialysis may be used as a temporary measure. In high degree renal
failure also called as uremia or end-stage renal disease, the dialysis cannot be done.
Thus the surgical transplantation of a matching donor kidney is the only option left
for the permanent treatment.

Corrected Text (PAGE 19)

THERMOREGULATION

Homeostatic control systems operate in organisms to cope with environmental stresses
including temperature extremes.

Adaptations in Plants to Low and High Temperature

High Temperature: High temperature denatures the enzymes and damages the
cells, therefore, it harms or kills the plants. Plants use evaporative cooling to
manage with high temperature. Hot and dry weather, however, causes water deficiency
resulting in closing of stomata, thus plants suffer in such conditions. Most plants have
adapted to survive in heat stress as the plants of temperate regions face the stress of 40°C
and above temperature. The cells of these plants synthesize large quantities of special
proteins called heat-shock proteins. These proteins embrace enzymes and other proteins
thus help to prevent denaturation.

Low Temperature: In low temperature the fluidity of the cell membrane is altered,
because lipids of the membrane become locked into crystalline structures, which affects
the transport of the solutes. The structure of the membrane proteins is also affected.
Plants respond to cold stress by increasing proportion of unsaturated fatty acids, which
help membrane to maintain structure at low temperature by preventing crystal formation.
This adaptation requires time because of this reason rapid chilling of plants is more
stressful than gradual drop in air temperature.

Freezing temperature causes ice crystal formation. The confinement of ice
formation around cell wall does not affect as badly and plants survive, however,
formation of ice crystals within protoplasm perforates membranes and organelles hence
killing the cells. The plants native to cold region such as oaks, maples, roses and other
plants have adapted to bring changes in solutes composition of the cells, which causes
cytosol to supercool without ice formation, although ice crystals may form in the cell
walls.

Corrected Text (PAGE 20)

MECHANISMS IN ANIMALS

Body Heat, Heat Gain and Loss

Temperature of an animal depends upon the rate of change of body heat which in
turn depends on rate of heat production through metabolic processes and the rate of
external heat gain and rate of heat loss. This transfer of heat between an animal and its
environment is done in numerous ways. Principally, infrared thermal radiation and direct
and reflected sunlight transfer heat into the animal; whereas radiation and evaporation
transfer heat out to the environment.

Temperature Classification of Animals

Animals deal with variation in the thermal characteristics of their environment.
There are animals in which body temperature tends to fluctuate more or less with ambient
temperature where air or water temperatures are changed. These are poikilotherms; all
invertebrates, fish, amphibians and reptiles are considered in this category. The other
animals exposed to changing air or water temperature maintain their body temperature;
these are the homeotherms and include birds and mammals. Several difficulties arise with
this terminology with studies. It is observed that deep sea fishes maintain their body
temperature due to the constant natural surroundings and lizards regulate their body
temperature; and in contrast numerous birds and mammals vary their body temperature.

Therefore, a more widely applicable temperature classification scheme is based
on the source of heat production. According to this, animals that generate their own body
heat through heat production as by-product during metabolism are endotherms including
birds, some fishes and flying insects. Ectotherm is the other type, which produce
metabolic heat at low level and that is also exchanged quickly with the environment,
however, absorb heat from their surroundings. Most invertebrates, fish, amphibians and
reptiles are in this category. A third category, heterotherms, is of those animals who are
capable of varying degrees of endothermic heat production but generally do not regulate
their body temperature within a narrow range e.g. bats, hummingbird etc.

Corrected Text (PAGE 21)

Regulation of Heat Exchange between Animals and Environment

Animals use different mechanisms for such regulation and these are of structural,
physiological and behavioral nature.

Structural Adaptations: These may be long term changes in subdermal fatty layer,
insulation and pelage. The presence of sweat glands and lungs modified for panting.

Physiological Adaptations: These regulate blood flow to the skin; specifically greater
blood flow in warmth to dissipate heat and lower in colds to economize heat loss, also the
activation of certain muscles causes plumage fluffing. Similarly activation of sweat
glands is done for evaporative cooling.

Behavioral Adaptations: These include moving of the animal to an environment
where heat exchange between these is minimal e.g. ground squirrels move to burrows in
midday heat and lizards bask in sun to gain heat. Animals also control the amount of
surface area available for heat exchange by adjusting their postures.

Corrected Text (PAGE 22)

THERMOREGULATION IN MAMMALS (HUMAN)

Regulatory Strategies

Mammals including human maintain their high body temperature within a narrow
range of about 36–38 °C because of their endothermic characteristics. The origin of
endothermy in birds and mammals has provided the opportunity to keep high metabolic
rate and availability of energy round the clock, thus had acquired greater ability to
adaptations and has assisted in much of their wider diversity and distribution in
diversified regions of the earth.

These regulate the rate of metabolic heat production, balancing it with the rate at
which they gain or lose heat from the surroundings. The rate of heat production is
increased by increased muscle contraction by movements or shivering so called as
shivering thermogenesis. Also hormones trigger the heat production as do thyroid
hormones and are termed as non-shivering thermogenesis. Some mammals possess
brown fat, which is specialized for rapid heat production. In overproduction of heat it is
dissipated through exposed surfaces by increasing blood flow or the evaporative cooling.
In mammals it is observed that skin has been adapted as the organ of thermoregulation
(Fig.15.14).

Corrected Text (PAGE 23)

In Cold Temperature: Mammals have various mechanisms that regulate heat
exchange with their environment. Vasodilation and vasoconstriction affect heat exchange
and may contribute to regional temperature differences within an animal. On a cool day a
human’s temperature may be several degrees lower in the arms and legs than in the trunk,
where the most vital glands are situated. Most land mammals respond to cold by raising
their furs thereby trapping the thicker layer of still air and it acts as good insulator
between animal skin and the surroundings. Human mostly rely on a layer of fat just
insulating beneath the skin as insulating material against heat loss. Similarly marine
mammals such as whales and seals inhabit much colder water than their body temperature
have a very thick layer of insulating fat called blubber just under the skin.

In Warm Temperature: Marine mammals dispose off their excess heat into warm
seas by large number of blood vessels in the outer layer of the skin. This dissipates the
heat from the skin surface. In terrestrial mammals, in contrast, is the mechanism of
evaporative cooling. The sweat gland activity and the evaporative cooling is one of
the major temperature reducing strategies. Panting, the evaporative cooling in the
respiratory tract, is the other mechanism as represented in the dogs. Bats etc. use saliva
and urine for evaporative cooling.

Thermostat Function and Feedback Controls in Human

The body temperature regulation in humans is based on complex homeostatic
systems facilitated by feedback mechanisms. The homeostatic thermostat is present in the
hypothalamus, a brain part. It responds to the changes in the temperature above and
below a set point which is 37°C.

In case of increase in temperature above the set point, certain warm-temperature
sensitive thermoreceptors in skin, hypothalamus and other parts of nervous system send
the signals to the system that increase the blood flow to the skin and also cause sweat
gland activation and the sweat is evaporated for the cooling.

In cold temperature, the cold receptors send the impulses to hypothalamus to
inhibit heat loss mechanisms and activate the heat conservation mechanisms. This
includes constriction of superficial blood vessels and stimulating shivering and non-
shivering mechanisms.

Temperature in fever (Pyrexia)

In bacterial and viral infections mainly, leukocytes increase in number. These
pathogens and the blood cells produce chemicals called pyrogens. Pyrogens displace
the set point of hypothalamus above the normal point of 37°C. Fever or high temperature
helps in stimulating the protective mechanisms against the pathogens.

(i) ——— is the ability of an organism to regulate its fluid contents.
(ii) The detoxification of ammonia to urea requires the precursor of
ornithine.
(iii) The kidney nephron is closely associated with network of
capillaries.
(iv) Maximum water reabsorption takes place in the
proximal convoluted tubule.
(v) Antidiuretic hormone acts on collecting duct to promote reabsorption of water
in vertebrates.
(vi) The nephrons arranged along the border of cortex and medulla, with tubular
system looping deep in the inner medulla, are called
juxtamedullary nephrons.
(vii) The non-surgical procedure of removing kidney stone is termed as
lithotripsy.
(viii) Homeostatic thermostat in human
is located in hypothalamus.