MAN AND HIS ENVIRONMENT

PREMISES
“Allah is He Who sendeth the winds so that they raise clouds, and spreadeth them along the sky as pleaseth Him, and causeth them to break and thou seest the rain downpouring from within them”. – (Translation)

Humans, like other species, are part of the earth’s environment. The first humans were hunters and had low population. At that time, humans functioned as natural predators and herbivores. With the adoption of agriculture, some 10,000 years ago, human populations and conversion of land to agricultural production began to increase readily. Industrialization changed the nature of human interaction with the global environment. The demand for energy to run industry and the concentration of populations or urbanization brought environmental problems of great magnitude.

Environment is a treasure of all types of resources essential to maintain life on earth. Environment is a direct or indirect source of food, shelter, clothing, fuel etc. for humans.

RENEWABLE AND NON-RENEWABLE RESOURCES
Environmental resources are the primary sources for the existence of humans. These resources are either renewable or non-renewable. Air, water, food, land, forests and wild life are renewable resources because they are never depleted. They are recycled.
Non-renewable resources include metals, non-metallic minerals and fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas). These resources are exhaustible and once consumed in nature, there is no such thing as renewal.

In living things, food is recycled in the nutrient cycle. The sun supplies food to living things. Any disturbance in the nutrient cycle can be upset when:
(1) not enough food is produced,
(2) too much food is consumed,
(3) decayed nutrients are not returned to the soil.

These resources necessary for life form a part of natural cycles. These cycles run continuously. The driving force behind all of these cycles is the sun.

The earth is a self-sustained unit. We are in our ecosystem. Nothing in these occurrences can be wasted if our ecosystem stays sound. There is no chance of running out of resources as long as we conserve water and the life we have.

Renewable Resources
Renewable resources are natural resources that you can use again and again. There is a natural cycle of trees, water, land and air. That is why they are called renewable resources. Some of the renewable natural resources are:

Air: It is several kilometers thick and makes a atmosphere surrounding the earth. Air is a very important natural resource. It consists of oxygen (O₂), carbon dioxide (CO₂), and traces of other gases. Oxygen is consumed in respiration and is again formed in plants through natural cycle for making food and other substances. Air is being polluted rapidly due to industrialization and contains some common gases like carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and dust.

Greenhouse effect in hot areas is common…

Water: About 70% of the earth’s surface is covered by water and air. It is also major constituent of the organisms and makes 60% of our body weight.
About 3% of the earth’s water is present as drinking water. The rest is found in oceans and seas. Only potable fresh water is useful for drinking. The main uses of water are domestic use, irrigation and generation of hydropower.

Oceans: Oceans are raw materials in making markers of daily uses like ornaments and various products. From seawater, minerals, common salt, wind and water are used in cooling and manufacturing in various industries.

Pollution: Seawater is extremely attacked by smoke and pollution. Purification of water is settled out by microorganisms. Chemical wastes pollute water and make it harmful for aquatic life. By pollution of fresh water sources, we will soon run out of fresh water supply. These measures should be taken in order to improve the situation.

Land: Land is an important natural resource. Soil can be defined as “the upper layer of earth’s crust.” The basic constituents of soil are sand particles, silt, water, minerals and soil organisms.

Plants play a very important role in soil. Land plants depend directly on soil for mechanical support. Soil provides water, organic and inorganic nutrients to plants.
Only 30% of total land is available. Most of this land is covered with mountains.
Population makes more use of land; half of the total available land is used for cultivation. Soil is continuously being depleted of its mineral nutrients due to vigorous crop production. Land may also be abused in many ways like erosion, poor agricultural practice, excessive grazing, leaching etc. Rapid urbanization is also a factor in disturbing the natural land conditions. Fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides are also polluting the soil. To conserve soil, proper awareness is required. Farmers and general public may be educated through media.

Wild life: In general, wild life refers to all non-cultivated plants and non-domesticated animals. Game animals and plants have been major source of food for humans. All living organisms are interdependent. There is a delicate balance between living organisms and environment. Man has been disturbing this balance since very long. Man's decisions regarding the usefulness or harmfulness of the wild life have led to severe disturbances in natural habitats. As a result many animals and plants have either become extinct or else decreased in their number so as to be on the verge of extinction. These are known as endangered species. Today there are thousands of endangered plants and animals. Wildlife is a renewable resource but it can become non-renewable under extreme conditions of human intervention. Water reserves where fishing is prohibited have also been set up to protect marine life. Rare species are sometimes kept in zoos, where they can safely breed.

Wild life plays a very important role in food-chain. Without these, the food chain can be disturbed to such an extent that it will be very difficult to maintain the balance. The effects of changes in the environment brought about by man are becoming more and more apparent with the passage of time. He must keep the wild life balance; otherwise, it may also jeopardize his own existence.

Energy: The energy shortage that we all have felt in the last decade has been a result of rapidly decreasing supplies of fossil fuels i.e. coal, oil and natural gas. Like other environmental resources, energy resources can also be classified as inexhaustible and exhaustible. Inexhaustible resources include solar energy, falling water (hydropower), wind, ocean thermal gradients, waves, tides, currents, geothermal energy and biomass.
On the other hand, fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas are exhaustible sources of energy.

Fossil fuels: Coal, oil and gas are fossil fuels. 95% of our daily energy requirements are met with these resources. They are called fossil fuels because they are the remains of plants and animals of past ages which became buried due to environmental hazards and were fossilized in deeper layers of earth and sea. Pakistan has reservoirs for gas, oil and coal. Extensive drilling for oil is being carried out in various regions of Pakistan. Fossil fuels are present in earth in fixed and limited quantities and they will be exhausted sooner or later, affecting the standard and life style of the future citizens. Thus fossil sources must be used properly and search for other sources of energy must also be carried out.

Hydroelectric power: Rain is a renewable energy source. Water gets energy indirectly from the sun. Rain that falls on high mountains possesses a large amount of gravitational potential energy. As rain falls, it accelerates and its kinetic energy increases. The kinetic energy of falling water rotates turbines at the base of dams. The turning turbines will in turn rotate electric generators to produce electricity, which is known as hydroelectric power or hydropower. It is cheap and non-pollutant source of energy which helps keep the environment safe.

Tidal power: Tides are mainly caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and to a lesser extent by the gravitational pull of the sun. The constantly changing tides drive water towards or away from the land. The difference between the water at high and low tides is used in a tidal power station to generate electricity. A tidal power station consists of a long dam called a tidal barrage. Flow of water across the barrage turns turbines which in turn rotate the generators to produce electricity.

Wind power: Wind is moving air. It is caused by sun heating different areas of the earth surface unevenly. As warm air rises, cooler air rushes to take its place. Different temperatures at different places have created various high and low pressure regions. Wind blows from area of high pressure to area of lower pressure. Modern windmills or wind turbines harness wind energy to generate electricity. Wind energy is renewable. However, windmills stop working when the wind slows down. To produce sufficient electricity, they must be built in large number at places where steady winds blow.

Nuclear energy: Nuclear energy is released in a nuclear power station. Large amounts of heat energy is released in nuclear fission which takes place in a nuclear reactor. This heat energy is then used to convert water into steam, which drives turbines that turn electric generators.
Nuclear power stations do not produce dust, water or air pollutants, unlike fossil fuels. However, accidents can occur and nuclear waste is dangerous.

Geothermal energy: Volcanoes, hot springs and geysers allow the escape of hot substances from the inside of the earth. The natural heat energy trapped underground is called geothermal energy.
Hot water or steam carrying geothermal energy comes up to the surface in some parts of the world such as New Zealand and Iceland.
Geothermal energy is free and can last for a long time. Sites of geothermal energy are usually located in areas far away from their consumers. This makes the harnessing of geothermal energy at these sites impracticable. Furthermore, harmful substances such as boron and oxides of sulphur are also released together with the hot water or steam.

Solid waste: Conversion of waste materials like trash, paper, organic manure, plastic materials, cans, agriculture and industrial waste etc. by hydrogenation, pyrolysis (destructive distillation) or bioconversion can provide oil and gas and their threat as a source of pollution of land and water can be reduced.

Ocean thermal gradient: In oceans, especially in tropical regions, temperature of surface water is about 25°C and that at the depth of a few hundred meters only 5°C. This develops an ocean thermal gradient and heat is conducted from region of higher to lower temperature. Man has developed the technology to use this thermal gradient to drive a turbine for electricity generation, but this may also disturb the marine ecosystem.

Energy conservation: The energy sources on earth are limited. Hence, there is need to have balanced and planned use of energy resources. Here are some ways in which we can save energy:
• Develop and use energy-efficient machines, engines and manufacturing processes.
• Drive less, walk and use public transport more.
• Switch off lights and electrical appliances when they are not in use.
• Minimize the use of air conditioners.

DEGRADATION AND DEPLETION OF RESOURCES
Natural resources include water, air, soil, minerals and fossil fuels together with all other species of living organisms.
Overhunting and overfishing has resulted in some cases in the extinction of species. Many countries depend on food from the sea. This has led to over harvesting.
Deforestation and cutting down natural forests to obtain building material and fuel destroys natural habitats.

Modification of Environment
In old times, humans lived simple lives that required less. But industrial development has increased the consumption of clean water, food and fuel.
Humans use many different types of machines, washing machines, refrigerators and other appliances.
Man’s negative work in all activities has made the environment more polluted with smoke and many other harmful gases.
They use energy stationarily
Buildings use energy by lighting and air conditioning systems.

IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENT
Population, food and energy are related.
Early in England there was a severe famine. Later, health improved and death rates became lower. But population grew rapidly.
Hunger became common; crime increased.

Human culture commenced over 5000 years ago leading to the development of industry, technology and modern medicine during the last 200 years. Modern man was able to modify his external environment by constructing houses, making clothes and releasing heat energy from fossil fuels so that the physical environment would not affect him, making it possible to live in almost any climate.

Population Explosion
Many of the problems of the world are caused or made worse by increasing human population. Demography is the study of human populations and things that affect them.

The population of Pakistan was 32.5 million at the time of independence in 1947. It has now increased to around 150—160 million people in year 2000. About 20 years ago the human population was increasing at the rate of 2% a year and was doubling every 35 years, thus increasing demands for food, space and other resources. There are various factors affecting population growth such as increase in life expectancy due to better living conditions, education, better food and medicine.

Population Pressures
More people, more agriculture and more industrialization is stressing the environment. Rapid population growth in less developing countries like Pakistan increases poverty and burdens on its limited resources. Only better planning and controlling degradation of the environment can save the earth.

As human population increases, there is an increased demand for food. When humans need food, they convert natural ecosystem to artificially maintained agricultural ecosystem. The natural mix of plants and animals are destroyed and replaced with species useful to humans. If these agricultural ecosystems are mismanaged, the total productivity may fall below that of the original ecosystem. The dust bowl of North America, desertification in Africa and destruction of tropical rain forests are well-known examples. The long-term health of the environment is sacrificed for the immediate needs of the population, thus leading to environmental degradation.

Table 27.1 Human population crises
(Your table remains unchanged except for spelling corrections.)

DEFORESTATION AND AFFORESTATION
“Cutting vast areas of forest for securing timber, planting subsistence crops or grazing cattle is called deforestation.”
In developing countries like Pakistan, there is a population explosion. These trees increase in population growth increase requirements for food and shelter. To overcome the basic needs of more food, we are cutting trees to make way for agriculture and land for crops. If forests are cut down at that rate, the canopy which protects the soil from the destructive effects of rain will no longer exist. Consequently some of the soil will be washed away as surface run-off, reaching streams and rivers.

The destruction of forests leaves the soil barren and this is called desertification. Nowadays we are facing the problem of environmental pollution. True plantation is the only solution to make our environment clean and safe.
Human activities have detrimental effects on natural carbon cycles.

The great forests of temperate and tropical regions have been destroyed because harvesting practices exceeded the sustainable limits and decreased the number of living trees that remove poisonous carbon from the atmosphere and through their growth retain carbon for a long period.

It is therefore necessary to replace decreased forests. New forests should be replanted. Reforestation is especially important in mountains and cold countries which often require bare soil to establish. In clear-cut areas, where all trees have been removed, resprouting from stumps or soil sometimes replaces plantation. However, afforestation is the establishment of new forests where none were previously.

Importance of Forests
Forests are very important components of the natural environment. They give protection to man as well as many other organisms. Fruits of forest trees are food for a number of animals. Forests regulate the flow of water to prevent soil erosion and make the environment very pleasant.

Forests provide us with:
(1) timber (construction wood for houses),
(2) firewood,
(3) medicine (herbal medicines, honey, wax) and many other products.

Regions with high rainfall (average 20 inches or above) are very important for tree growth. Trees are called natural water reservoirs because they intercept heavy rainfall and release the water slowly to underground layers. The soil beneath and to the streams and rivers hold the soil in place. Removal of forests shows soil run off, silting of lakes, rivers and dams, heavy floods and destruction of houses and villages.
The disastrous floods in Pakistan in 2010 occurred because of deforestation.

Forest and Climate
About half of the rain which falls in tropical forests comes from the transpiration by the trees themselves which also keep the environment cool and humid. When forests are removed, this source of rain is also removed. Cloud cover is reduced and the local climate changes quite dramatically. The temperature range from day to night is more extreme, and the rainfall diminishes.

Forest and Biodiversity
One of the most characteristic features of tropical forests is the enormous diversity of species they contain. Biodiversity refers to “the total number of different species within an ecosystem and the resulting complexity of interactions among them”.

POLLUTION
“The befouling of the environment by anything produced by humans which is or may be harmful to human life and other living organisms is called environmental pollution.”

Types of Pollution
Some main types of pollution are:
(1) air pollution or atmospheric pollution,
(2) water pollution,
(3) soil pollution,
(4) radiation pollution,
(5) noise pollution.

Air or Atmospheric Pollution
“The befouling of the air by anything that may be harmful to living organisms is air pollution.”

Air is not always as clean as it must be. Harmful substances such as sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, lead compounds and chlorofluorocarbons constitute the fastest-growing sources of air pollution produced by the activities of man. These harmful substances are known as pollutants.

Ozone layer depletion
Due to air pollution, we are facing the ozone layer depletion. The protective layer of atmosphere extending from 10–50 kilometers above earth, which prevents entry of UV radiation (ultraviolet rays) and protects us from these harmful rays of the sun, is called the ozone layer. In pure form ozone is bluish, explosive and a highly poisonous gas. Ozone (O₃) molecule is made up of three oxygen atoms.

The latest studies show that ozone is rapidly depleting.
This thinning is caused by increasing level of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which contain chlorine, fluorine and carbon.

These gases are produced from the use of air conditioners, refrigerators, vehicles, and operating refrigerators. As CFCs rise to the atmosphere, UV rays cause chlorine to release. The chlorine released destroys the ozone molecules in the ozone layer.

As the ozone layer becomes thinner, more and more ultraviolet rays from the sun reach the earth. These rays increase UV radiation levels over the Antarctic region dramatically.
If more ultraviolet rays reach the earth's surface, they will adversely affect by increasing temperatures. They cause skin cancers and cataracts, raise genetic mutations, diseases, stress and even harm marine plankton and ecosystems.

Greenhouse effect
To understand the phenomenon of greenhouse effect, what is greenhouse?
Light rays from the sun penetrate the glass of the greenhouse into the room and are reradiated as longer wave infrared radiation. The glass allows the rays to enter but does not allow these rays to escape outside and so the heat remains trapped inside.

Carbon dioxide behaves like the glass sheet of a greenhouse. It absorbs the sun’s energy but does not allow it to escape outside, as a result of which the temperature of the atmosphere increases. This increase in temperature is known as “greenhouse effect”.

Over-urbanization, deforestation and industrialization are the causes of greenhouse effect, which is gradually increasing temperature on earth, now being termed “global warming”. This may lead to rapid melting of ice caps and glaciers, bringing floods and changing the paths of winds and ocean currents, drastically affecting global weather conditions.

Table 27.2 Air Pollutants
(Your table kept exactly same, spelling corrected.)

Acid rain
This is also due to the overloading of nitrogen and sulphur cycle.
Acid rain damages life in lakes, farms and forests.
Acid water draining through the soil washes out essential nutrients such as calcium and potassium.
It also kills decomposers and microorganisms.
Plants poisoned and deprived of nutrients become weak and vulnerable to infection and insect attack.
Stone monuments like “Taj Mahal” are being eroded due to “stone cancer” from acid rains.

Water Pollution
Human activity is the main cause of pollution of canals, streams, lakes and even seawater. This polluted water affects the living organisms in it and directly or indirectly also humans. Main sources of water pollution are:

Sewage incomplete treatment: Sewage water contains harmful bacteria and poisonous chemicals. Certain bacteria cause diseases like typhoid and cholera when they get into the human intestine. Untreated sewage must not be emptied into rivers.

Oil and detergent: Oil pollution of the sea has become a familiar event, killing water life particularly dependent on aquatic producers and consumers of other levels.

Various detergents also enter the water from houses and laundries with harmful effects. Some detergents contain a lot of phosphate. This is not removed by sewage treatment and is discharged into rivers. The large amount of phosphate encourages growth of microscopic plants called algae (eutrophication). This affects the force of that aquatic reservoir.

Eutrophication or Algal Bloom
This is the natural process of excessive enrichment of water with nutrients by which large amounts of living organic matter grow in the water. Lakes slowly develop large concentrations of aquatic plant life which eventually decays. Human activities have speeded up this natural process of eutrophication by adding mineral and organic nutrients in larger quantities than nature would provide, from excreta, phosphates from washing powder and other detergents. Vast masses of algae feed and reproduce on these nutrients causing the water to become dense and green.

The dead algae are decomposed by bacteria. In freshwater and in seawater, both develop unpleasant color and smell.

Industrial Effluents
The chemical waste from industry comprises substances called effluents. Factories sometimes turn waterways into open sewers by dumping oil, toxic chemicals and other harmful liquids (called effluents) into them. They either kill the microorganisms that purify the water or inhibit their growth.

Insecticides, Herbicides and Fertilizers
Agrochemicals are used in agriculture. They are commonly called pesticides and fertilizers. Monocultures (population of only one species e.g. wheat) with dense population are very susceptible to attack by insects or spread of fungus disease. To combat these threats pesticides are used. A pesticide is a chemical which destroys agricultural pests or competitors.

Pesticides in food: Pesticides are inevitably poisonous in order to kill the pests. Many items of our food contain small amount of residual pesticides. Some of these are suspected for causing cancer and other disorders, but whether they do so in the very low dose that we ingest is not certain. Some scientists think the levels are so low as to be negligible. Peeling apples and potatoes removes most of the surface pesticides but there is not much you can do to reduce the internal ones. The use and quantity of pesticides must be approved by the Ministry of Agriculture.

Fertilizers: Man moves chemical elements and minerals into ecosystem from concentrated natural deposits for use as inorganic fertilizers or metal sources from mineral ores. Many of these chemical elements leave the ecosystem by being leached from the soil and drained into the rivers. Fertilizers are chemical substances used to add additional nutrients to the soil to increase its fertility.

HEALTH AND DISEASES
“The steady internal state of homeostasis is known as normal health, whereas disease may refer to the departure from normal or steady internal state of homeostasis, presenting through malfunction or functional disorders of the body.”

Classification and Causes of Diseases
Types and causes of diseases in humans are given:

(1) Hereditary diseases
Examples: Hemophilia, Down’s syndrome, Turner’s syndrome.

(2) Infections or pathogenic or parasitic
Diseases due to organisms that can be transmitted to others such as diphtheria, malaria, smallpox, tuberculosis, cholera, gonorrhea, AIDS.

(3) Nutritional deficiency
Examples: Scurvy, beriberi, anemia, goiter, kwashiorkor.

(4) Metabolic or hormonal disorders
Examples: Sugar (diabetes mellitus), cretinism and goiter.

(5) Physical disorders
Due to injury and accident; heat, cold and radiation.

(6) Chemical causes
Drug abuse, smoking, alcohol poisoning.

(7) Aging or degenerative diseases
Examples: Osteoarthritis, arteriosclerosis.

(8) Mental illness
Example: Alzheimer.