REPRODUCTION

“Then fashioned We the drop a clot, then fashioned We the clot a little lump, then
iy fashioned We the little lump bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, and then

a produced it as another creation. So blessed be Allah, the Best Creator of all!”
(Al-Quran 23:14)

REPRODUCTION

Every species of organisms can reproduce new individuals of that species. In
organisms, methods of reproduction are varied and some are quite complex. In one
respect, reproduction differs from all other functions of animals — it is not necessary for
the well-being of the individual. Although reproduction has nothing to do with the
survival of the individual, it is very important to the survival of a species or a population.
Reproduction is the mechanism that produces new generations and maintains a species.

Reproduction is of two types, asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction.
Asexual reproduction requires only a single parental organism which gives rise to
offspring by mitotic cell division, during which the total chromosome content of the cell
is exactly replicated and passed on to daughter cells, so that the offspring are genetically
identical to the parent. Methods of asexual reproduction are fission, sporulation, budding,
vegetative propagation, artificial propagation, parthenogenesis and apomixis etc.

Sexual reproduction usually involves two parents. A fertilized egg is produced
through the union of meiotically produced specialized sex cells (egg and sperm) from
each parent. Meiosis or reduction division gives rise to gametes (gametogenesis) in
which not only the chromosome number is halved (haploid) but reshuffling of genes
leads to recombination of genes. This not only maintains the chromosome number in a
species but also produces genetic variations, an important factor in the survival and
adaptation of a species or a population (Fig. 18.1).

In plants, if there is alternation of generations namely a diploid sporophyte and a
haploid gametophyte, meiosis occurs during spore formation (sporogenesis).

In asexual reproduction, although increase in number of genetically alike
individuals from a parent is very rapid, this is not an adaptive method and may at
some stage jeopardize the survival of a species. Man has favoured this type of
reproduction for his own needs, commonly in plants. But now tissue culturing in plants
and cloning in animals are being adopted for producing organisms of valuable
characteristics, without a change in their genetic make-up. Cloning has been practiced

successfully but its disadvantages like rapid aging and low resistance to environmental
stress and diseases are still limitations for commercial ventures. Also it is still not
being accepted socially and morally in general.

REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS

In plants both sexual and asexual reproduction are found. In asexual reproduction
layering, grafting, budding etc. are the artificial modes.

In sexual reproduction, plants have diplohaplontic life cycle with alternating
diploid sporophyte and haploid gametophyte generations. If the two generations are
vegetatively similar, such alternation of generations is referred to as isomorphic, and if
they are dissimilar it is called heteromorphic.

Seed plants are predominantly present all around us due to their better sexual
reproduction mechanism like modification of flower and inflorescence for pollination,
providing the basis of oasis by pollen tubes, evolution of pollen tube is an

important step in land adaptation by spermatophytes. Pollen tube acts
as vehicle for male gametes for their safe transport to female gamete in
ovule in hostile land environment.
Evolution of pollen tube is parallel to
the evolution of seed and is a tool of
success for seed plants.

Fig. 18.1 (b) Spermatophyte life cycles
(i) Gymnosperm life cycle, Pinus sylvestris
(ii) Angiosperm life cycle.

Parthenocarpy

In some cases fruit development proceeds without fertilization and thus no seed
formation takes place e.g. banana, pineapples and some varieties of oranges and grapes.
Such development is called parthenocarpy. It is due to hormonal imbalance; usually high
auxin levels occur in these ovaries. Parthenocarpy is sometimes artificially induced for
commercial purposes, by adding auxins as in tomato, peppers etc.

Seed Dormancy

It is the special condition of rest, which enables an embryo to survive the long
periods of unfavourable environmental conditions, such as water scarcity, or low

temperature. During this period of rest the embryo ceases or limits its growth. This is
of great survival importance to the plant in that it prevents the dormant seed
from germinating in response to conditions such as a warm spell in winter,
which, although apparently favourable, are only temporary. Germination or
resumption of normal growth by a dormant embryo requires certain very precise
combinations of environmental cues, to avoid any accidental stimulus which may
prove fatal later on.

Fruit set and Fruit ripening

Germinating pollen grain is not only an important structure for safe transfer of
gametes and insurance for fertilization but also a rich source of auxins as well as
commonly stimulating the tissues of the style and ovary to produce more auxin. This
auxin is necessary for ‘fruit set’, i.e. retention of the ovary, which becomes the fruit after
fertilization. Without it abscission of flowers normally occurs, leading to low fruit yields.
After fertilization, the ovary and the ripe seeds continue to produce auxins which
stimulate fruit development. Developing seeds are not only a rich source of auxins and
gibberellins, but also of cytokinins. These growth substances are mainly associated with
development of the embryo and accumulation of food reserves in the seed and sometimes
in the pericarp (fruit wall).

Fruit ripening is often accompanied by a burst of respiratory activity called the
climacteric. This is associated with ethane production, which helps in ripening of the fruit.

Photoperiodism

Apart from photosynthesis and phototropic responses, another very important
way in which light exerts its influence on living organisms is through variations in day
length called photoperiod. In plants, photoperiod and temperature affect flowering, fruit
and seed production, bud and seed dormancy, leaf fall and germination.

Photoperiod affects flowering, when shoot meristems start producing floral buds
instead of leaves and lateral buds.

Effect of photoperiodism was first studied in 1920 by Garner and Allard. They
studied that tobacco plant flowers only after exposure to a series of short days. Tobacco
plant naturally flowers under same conditions, in autumn, but flowering could be induced
by conditions artificially exposing to short days. With further studies they were able to
classify flowering plants into long-day plants, which require long days for flowering and
day-neutral plants which flower without being influenced by photoperiod.

Later on, further studies indicated that it is really the length of the dark period
which is critical. Thus short-day plants are really long-night plants. If they are grown in
short days but the long night is interrupted by a short light period, flowering is

prevented. Long-day plants will flower in short nights if the long night period is

Table 18.1 (a) Classification of plants according to photoperiodic
requirements for flowering

Short-day plants (SDPs) | Long-day plants (LDPs) | Day-neutral plants (DNPs)
Flowering induced by dark | Flowering induced by | Flowering independent of
periods longer than a | dark periods shorter than a | photoperiod.
critical length, e.g. | critical length, e.g. |
cocklebur 8.5 h; tobacco | henbane 13 h; | e.g. cucumber; tomato,
10–11 h. | snapdragon 11–13 h. | garden pea, maize, cotton.

(Under natural conditions equivalent to days shorter than a critical length,
e.g. cocklebur 15.5 h; tobacco 13–14 h) etc.

Table 18.1 (b) Some phytochrome-controlled responses in plants.

General process effected
Germination - Germination of some seeds e.g. some lettuce varieties.
Germination of fern spores.
Photomorphogenesis (light-controlled development of form and structure) - Leaf expansion in dicotyledons; leaf unrolling in grasses (monocotyledons).
Chloroplast development.
Greening (protochlorophyll converted to chlorophyll).
Photoperiodism - Stimulates or inhibits flowering depending on species.

Further experimentation also revealed that quantity of light is also influenced by
the quality of light. Cocklebur, a short day plant, will not flower if its long night is
interrupted but experiments revealed that red light was effective in preventing flowering.
Far-red light reversed the effect of red light. It was also observed that the sequence of
light treatment always determines the response. This response to light intensity and
quality led to the discovery of blue light sensitive protein pigments — phytochromes.

Phytochrome exists in two forms i.e. P660 and P730. P660, a quiescent form,
absorbs red light at a wavelength of 660 nm and is converted to active P730. P730
absorbs far red light at 730 nm and is converted to P660. In nature, the P660 to P730
conversion takes place in daylight and P730 to P660 conversion occurs in the dark.
Thus during the day a plant has more P730 phytochromes while during the night it contains
more phytochromes in the form of P660. The presence of either form provides the plants
with a means of detecting whether it is in a light or dark environment. The rate at which P
730 is converted to P660 provides the plant with a “clock” for measuring the duration of
darkness.

It has been found that red light inhibits flowering in short day plants but
promotes flowering in long day plants, under conditions during which flowering normally
takes place. This observation led to the hypothesis that the P730–P660 interconversion
might be the plant time-regulator for flowering. According to this hypothesis, P730,
converted from P660 by the absorption of red light, would inhibit flowering in short day
plants but promote flowering in long day plants. Because P730 accumulates in the day
and diminishes at night, short day plants could flower only if the night were long enough,
during which a great amount of P730 would not be completely inactivated, so that
enough P730 would remain at the end of the night to promote flowering. But now it is
generally agreed that the time measuring phenomenon of flowering is not totally
controlled by the interconversion of P660 to P730. Other factors, like presence or
absence of light, and length of dark or light period also play an important role in
flowering. Phytochromes seem to be responsible for the detection of either light or
darkness. The biological clock once stimulated causes production of florigen hormone in
leaves, which travels through phloem to the floral buds, initiating flowering.

Perennials and biennial plants are stimulated to flower by exposure to low
temperature. This is called vernalisation. The low temperature stimulus is received by
the apex of a mature stem or embryo of the seed but not by the leaves as in some
plants. In some plants, vernalisation is an absolute requirement or in some cases it
simply accelerates induction of flowering. The duration of low temperature (chilling) treatment
required varies from four days to three months. Temperature around 4°C is found to be
effective. Vernalisation serves to synchronise the reproductive
environment, ensuring reproduction at favourable times of

the year. They also ensure that members of the same species flower at the same time,
encouraging cross pollination for genetic variability.

REPRODUCTION IN ANIMALS

Animals like plants also reproduce both asexually as well as sexually. But
asexual reproduction is less common in animals as compared to plants. Binary fission,
multiple fission (animal-like protoctists), budding (Hydra), parthenogenesis, tissue
culturing, cloning and identical twins are the common asexual methods of reproduction.

Parthenogenesis is defined as the development of an egg without fertilization. In honey bee males are
good examples. In the honeybees, males (or drones) develop from unfertilized eggs. The queen bee, though carrying male gametes from males, has the
ability to lay eggs that have not been fertilized. The sperms she receives from a drone bee
are stored in a pouch closed off by a valve. The eggs may be fertilized or may not be
fertilized from the stored sperms. The haploid egg develops into haploid offspring; this is
called haploid parthenogenesis.

In some cases e.g. in aphids, diploid parthenogenesis may occur, in which the egg-
producing cells of the female undergo a modified form of meiosis involving either
no reduction in the number of chromosomes; they retain the diploid number
of chromosomes. Egg (diploid) develops into a functional embryo in the absence of a
male gamete. The rest of the ovule develops into the seed and the ovary
into the fruit.

TISSUE CULTURING AND CLONING

In tissue culturing technique in plants, cambium tissue excised from plants can
be stimulated by the addition of nutrients, cytokinins, and IAA (indole acetic acid). These
cells show continued growth and differentiate into a new plant, genetically identical to
their parents.

Tissue culture is now widely used for the rapid propagation of desired varieties
or for varieties difficult to propagate by cuttings. Similar techniques have been developed
for the tissue culture of animal cells.

Organisms produced from a single cell by subculturing (cloning) are called
clones. In animals and especially among vertebrates, a nucleus from the somatic cell is
removed and introduced into an egg cell, whose own nucleus has been destroyed by ultra-
violet radiation. The egg with transplanted diploid somatic cell nucleus develops into an
organism, genetically identical to the parent who has contributed the nucleus.

The cloning of desirable animals such as prize bulls, race horses etc. might be as
useful as cloning of useful varieties of plants.

However, the application of the technique to humans would be open to serious
moral questions. Theoretically any number of genetically identical copies of the same
man or woman might be made.

The use of cloned cells allows the quantitative study of the action of hormones,
drugs and antibodies to be made on cells. Such a technique is a useful substitute for
investigating the effect of drugs, cosmetics and pharmaceutical products on animal cells
without exposing laboratory animals to these chemicals.

Cloning has the advantage that all the offspring behave similarly, but should an
environmental hazard develop (like an outbreak of a disease), non-resistant strains are
present to lessen the impact. Also the degree to which environment influences clone
development is not fully known and any cloned cell would have to go through all the
phases of development once again including embryo, fetus, baby and childhood (in case
of human beings).

IDENTICAL TWINS

In higher vertebrates including man, a zygote after fertilization undergoes
cleavage (cell division by mitosis). When embryo is at two-celled stage, the two
blastomeres, instead of remaining together, may separate and behave as two independent
units each giving rise to a new individual. Both the organisms are products of mitosis,

and as they have identical genetic make-up they are called identical twins. In some cases, more than one egg is produced by the female and all these eggs
are independently fertilized forming two or more zygotes. These zygotes develop into new
individuals but with different genetic combinations. Such twins or triplets are called
fraternal twins or triplets. They are produced sexually.

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION

Sexual reproduction is more advanced than asexual method of reproduction and is a primitive form of
life in early stages. At a later stage, a mechanism evolved
involving union of gametes. Meiosis and genetic recombination played a role in the
development of more complex forms of life and types of gametes, from
non-motile female gametes (eggs, ova) to motile male gametes (sperm). Sexual reproduction
is elaborated in the following table 18.2:

Table 18.2

Asexual reproduction | Sexual reproduction
One parent only. | Usually two parents.
No gametes are produced. | Gametes are produced. These are haploid
and nuclei of two gametes fuse |
(fertilization) to form a diploid zygote.
Meiosis absent. | Meiosis is present at some stage in life
cycle to prevent chromosome doubling in
every generation.
Offspring identical to parent. | Offspring are not identical to parents.
They show genetic variation as a result of
genetic recombination.
Commonly occurs in plants, less | Occurs in the majority of plant and
differentiated animals and micro-organisms. | animal species.
Absent in more differentiated animals.
Often results in rapid production of large | Less rapid increase in number.
numbers of offspring.

Both in animals and plants, evolution of sexual reproduction also lead to the
differentiation of sexes (male or female). Organisms are either having one sex (unisexual)
or both the sexes (hermaphrodite or bisexual). Advanced mode of sexual reproduction has
unisexuality in animals but in plants bisexuality in general is retained. Despite the
bisexuality (tape worm, earthworm etc.), cross fertilization is ensured for maintaining the
advantage of genetic recombination.

Fertilization is the process which leads to the union of gametes. Fertilization may
occur outside the body (external fertilization) or inside the body of the female (internal
fertilization).

External fertilization occurs in aquatic environment where male gametes can
swim towards the female gametes in water medium. Development is also external due to
the constant/stable conditions of water (frog, fish etc.)

In terrestrial conditions fertilization is internal. Sperms are lodged in the female
body where fertilization occurs. This may lead to external development as in reptiles and
birds. They lay shelled eggs to protect the developing embryo from harsh terrestrial
conditions. Such animals are called oviparous.

In mammals, internal fertilization leads to internal development and development
of embryo is accomplished inside the female body, which gives birth to young ones — such
animals are called viviparous.

In some mammals like duckbill platypus and spiny anteater internal fertilization
leads to internal development of young one in a shelled egg and when development is
completed, shelled egg is laid which hatches to offspring. This is called ovoviviparous
condition.

Viviparous and ovoviviparous animals provide more protection to their young
ones during development. Nourishment is provided either through stored food in the egg
or through placenta by the mother.

REPRODUCTION IN MAN

Male and female have separate reproductive systems.

(a) Male Reproductive System

Male reproductive system consists of external genitalia which consist of a pair of
testes which lie outside the body, in the sac-like scrotum and male copulatory organ
which is used to transfer the sperms into the female reproductive tract. Each testis
consists of a highly complex duct system called seminiferous tubules, in which repeated
division by the cells of the germinal epithelium produce spermatogonia. These increase in
size and differentiate into primary spermatocytes which undergo meiotic division to form
secondary spermatocytes and spermatids. Eventually, the spermatids differentiate into
mature sperms. Fluid secreted by Sertoli cells provides liquid medium, protection and
nourishment to sperms while they are in the tubules (Fig 18.2 a,b, Fig. 18.3). The sperms are
then transferred to the main duct of the male reproductive tract, the vas deferens, which
forms highly convoluted epididymis. The sperms then pass through the urinogenital duct and
are discharged out.

Fig. 18.2 The human male reproductive system.
The male reproductive system consists of two testes that produce sperms, ducts that carry the
sperms, and various glands.

Between the seminiferous tubules are interstitial cells which secrete testosterone.
This hormone is essential for the successful production of sperms and also contributes to the
development of male secondary sexual characteristics during puberty.

(b) Female Reproductive System

The female reproductive system consists of the ovaries, the oviducts, uterus and
the external genitalia (Fig. 18.4).

A pair of ovaries lies within the body cavity of the female. Germ cells in the
ovary produce many oogonia which divide mitotically to form primary oocytes. These
are enclosed in groups of follicle cells. The primary oocyte divides meiotically into the
haploid secondary oocyte and first polar body. Second meiotic division in the oocyte
proceeds as far as metaphase but is not completed until the oocyte is fertilized by the
sperm. In human only one ovum is usually discharged from the ovary at one time, this
phenomenon is called ovulation.

The ovum is then transferred to the oviduct generally called fallopian tube or
uterine tube. The uterine tube opens into the uterus. The fertilization of the ovum takes
place in the proximal part of the oviduct. The fertilized ovum (zygote) enters the uterus
and implants (implantation/conception) and undergoes further development. A placenta is
established between the uterine and foetal tissues for the exchange of oxygen,
nutrients and other materials. Uterus opens into the vagina through the cervix. The vagina has independent openings to the exterior.

Gamete formation in females is cyclic. In females the production of egg is a cyclic activity compared to males in whom gamete production and release is a continuous process
beginning at puberty and lasting throughout life.

In human females, the periodic reproductive cycle is completed in approximately
28 days and involves changes in the structure and function of the whole reproductive
system. It is called the menstrual cycle and can be divided into four phases. The events
of the menstrual cycle involve the ovaries (ovarian cycle) and the uterus (uterine cycle)
and these are regulated by pituitary gonadotropins.

Primary steps in female reproductive cycles are:
(i) The pituitary gland on the onset of puberty, releases follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH) which stimulates the development of several primary follicles. Only one of
these follicles continues to grow with its primary oocyte while the rest break
down by a degenerative process known as follicle atresia.
(ii) The ovary, under the stimulus of FSH, also produces estrogen hormone. This, on
one hand, stimulates the endometrium (internal lining of the uterus wall) and
vascularizes it, and on the other hand, inhibits the secretion of FSH from pituitary gland.
(iii) The estrogen production prepares the uterus for conception partly and also follicle
develops ova. At this stage, female needs a physical stimulus of mating for
ovulation. She exhibits the desire for mating or is said to be on “heat”.
(iv) The follicle cells, after release of the egg, are modified to form a special structure
called corpus luteum. This yellowish glandular structure starts secreting
a hormone called progesterone. This hormone develops the endometrium and makes
it receptive for the implantation of the zygote (placenta formation).
(v) If fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum starts degenerating. The
progesterone secretion diminishes and its supporting effect on the endometrium
is reduced, which suffers a breakdown. This causes the discharge
of blood and cell debris known as menstruation. This stage usually lasts for 3–7
days (Fig 18.5).

The cycle is thus completed and the uterus is ready to enter into the next cycle.
The human menstrual cycle generally repeats every 25–30 days although there is
considerable variation in different individuals or even within the same individual at
different times of her age. The end or complete stop of the menstrual cycle is called
menopause, after which the female stops producing the ova.

Malnourishment and emotional stresses affect the female reproductive cycle,
which may be disturbed. The cycle may not be completed in its normal 28 days.

[Diagram of ovarian and uterine cycles]

The ovarian and uterine cycles in human female.

The timing of ovulation is timed to coincide with the thickening of the lining
of the uterus. The uterine cycle in humans involves the preparation of the uterine wall to receive
a fertilized ovum if fertilization occurs. Knowing how these two cycles compare, it is possible to
determine when pregnancy is most likely to occur.

Birth

The total gestation period (pregnancy) is usually about 280 days.

Once a placenta is established, it starts secreting the progesterone hormone
which maintains the pregnancy. Any disturbance in its secretion may lead to premature
birth or miscarriage. Human embryo remains enclosed in amniotic sac filled with
amniotic fluid which is protective and shock absorptive.

During this period the pituitary gland produces luteotropic hormone (LTH). Placenta
also secretes placental lactogen. Both these hormones stimulate mammary
gland development for lactation.

From beginning of the 3rd month of pregnancy, the human embryo is referred to
as the fetus. Most of the major organs are formed by the 12th week of pregnancy and the
remainder of the gestation period is taken up by growth.

It was thought that hormonal activities within the mother i.e. decrease in
progesterone level onset the birth. But recent evidence suggests that there is a high degree
of fetal involvement in the timing of birth. The initial stage of birth is the result of the
stimuli from the fetal pituitary. The ACTH released from fetal pituitary stimulates the fetal
adrenal gland to release corticosteroids, which cross the placental barrier and enter the
maternal blood circulation causing a decrease in progesterone production. The reduction
of progesterone level stimulates the pituitary gland to produce oxytocin hormone. This
induces labour pains, i.e. contraction of the uterus wall. The release of
oxytocin occurs in waves during labour and provides the force to
expel the fetus from the uterus. The cervix dilates and the uterine
contractions spread down over the uterus and are strongest from top to
bottom. Thus, pushing the baby downward leading to the delivery of
the baby. The umbilical cord is ligated and baby is released from the
mother.

Within 10–45 minutes after birth, the uterus contracts and separates the placenta
from the wall of the uterus and placenta then passes out through the vagina. This is called after birth. Bleeding, throughout this period, is controlled by the contraction of smooth
muscle fibers which completely surround all uterine blood vessels supplying the placenta.
Average loss of blood is about 350 cm³.

TEST TUBE BABIES

Recent biotechnical advances have led to many improvements in human life.
One of the important aspects is the test tube babies. Parents which are unable to enjoy the
normal process of fertilization and birth of their offspring due to some physiological and
physical abnormalities in any of the two parents are being benefited with this method.
Parental sperm and ovum are fertilized in vitro — outside the female body and then
the zygote is implanted back into the mother's uterus, placenta establishes and remaining
development takes place in the body of the mother leading to normal birth.

SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES (STD)

Unhealthy attitudes and low moral values sometimes lead to serious
complications. The carrier may transmit this disease to their healthy partners.

(i) Gonorrhoea
It is caused by a gram-negative bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae, mainly
affecting the mucous membrane of urinogenital tract. New born infants may acquire
serious eye infections if they pass through the infected birth canal. It is highly contagious
through sexual contacts.

(ii) Syphilis
It is caused by a spirochaete, Treponema pallidum. It damages the reproductive
organs, eyes, bones, joints, central nervous system, heart and skin. Sexual contact is the
major source of its dissemination.

(iii) Genital Herpes
It is caused by a herpes simplex type 2 virus, most frequently transmitted by
sexual contact causing infection of the genitalia. It produces genital soreness and ulcers in
the infected areas. In infected pregnant woman, virus can be transmitted to infant during
birth, causing damage to eyes and CNS of the infant.

AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)

You are already familiar with this dangerous disease. Sexual contact is one of the
causes of its spread.

The above dreadful sexual diseases can be controlled and prevented by
avoiding sexual contacts with carrier or diseased person and adopting hygienic
conditions. Treatment involves medication for a long period except AIDS at present.