SOME MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS

“And We send the winds for fertilizing and cause water to descend from the sky
and then We give it to you to drink. And it is you who are the tillers of the earth.”

SOME MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS

In the previous chapters, you have learned about the ecosystem. In this chapter,
we will discuss the aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, climate and weather.

CLIMATE
Life on earth, especially on land, is affected by both weather and climate. Weather
refers to short-term fluctuations in temperature, humidity, cloud cover, wind and
precipitation over periods of hours or days. Climate, in contrast, refers to overall patterns
of weather that prevail from year to year or century-to-century in a particular region.

AQUATIC OR HYDROSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM
Hydrospheric ecosystem is a “system in water where living and non-living
components exchange materials and transfer of energy also takes place within water”.
Salt-water ocean and sea are the largest ecosystems on the earth forming about 71% of its
surface. Fresh water ecosystems, in contrast, cover less than 1%. The unique properties
of water lead to some common features of aquatic ecosystems.

Temperature: Water changes its temperature slower than air, so temperature in
aquatic ecosystems is more moderate to support life.

Absorption of energy: Although water may appear quite transparent, it
absorbs a considerable amount of the light energy that sustains life. Even in
clear water, the intensity of light decreases rapidly with depth, so at depths
of 600 feet or more, little light is left to power photosynthesis.

Nutrients: The nutrients in aquatic ecosystems tend to be concentrated near the
bottom sediments supporting life where light levels often are too low to support
photosynthesis.

Abundant water with appropriate temperature: Water is an essential
requirement for life. It is available abundantly in aquatic ecosystems to support
life. These are major factors that determine the quantity and type of life in aquatic
systems.

Productivity of Aquatic Ecosystem
The productivity can be indicated by consumption of CO₂ and evolution of
oxygen in the process of photosynthesis.
The productivity of aquatic ecosystems is basically determined by the light and
nutrients. Light intensity and quality vary with the water depth, so the primary
productivity also varies with light. The amount of nutrients also changes with season.
Productivity also varies from zone to zone. Aquatic environments can easily be classified
into fresh water and marine (salt) water.

Fresh Water Lakes
Fresh water lakes vary tremendously in size, depth, and nature;
including distinct life zones and temperature stratification.

Life zones are based on access to light and nutrients: The distribution of life in
lakes depends on access to light, to nutrients and to place for attachment. The lake
ecosystem can be divided into three main zones.

Littoral zone (Near-shore): In this zone, the water is shallow, and plants find
abundant light, anchorage and adequate nutrients from the bottom sediments. Plants in
littoral zone communities are the most diverse; water lilies and entirely submerged
vascular plants and algae flourish at the deepest region of the littoral zone. The plants of
this zone trap sediments carried by streams, increasing the nutrient content in this region.
Living among the anchored plants are microscopic organisms called plankton. These can
be divided into two groups. Phytoplankton (Greek “drifting plants”): these include
photosynthetic protists, bacteria and algae. Zooplankton (Greek “drifting animals”):
such as protozoa and tiny crustaceans. The greatest diversity of animals in the lake is also
found in this zone. Littoral invertebrate animals include small crustaceans, insect larvae,
snails, flatworms, Hydra; vertebrates include frogs, aquatic snakes and turtles.

As the water increases in depth farther from the shore, plants are unable to
anchor to the bottom and still collect enough light for photosynthesis. This open water
area is divided into two regions: the upper limnetic zone and the lower profundal zone.

Limnetic zone: In this zone enough light penetrates to support photosynthesis. Here,
phytoplankton includes cyanobacteria (blue green algae) which serve as producers. These
are eaten by protozoa and small crustaceans, which in turn are consumed by fishes.

Profundal zone: In deeper parts of the lake, light is insufficient for photosynthesis;
organisms in this zone are nourished by detritus that falls from the limnetic zone.
These bottom communities are dominated by detritivores and decomposers, such as
certain invertebrates and bacteria.

Human activities in aquatic ecosystems greatly accelerate the process of eutrophication
(excessive nutrient enrichment). Nutrients are carried into lakes from farm feedlots and sewage. When excess nutrients enter lakes, algal blooms occur (green algae form a scum on the water surface). After blooms, large amounts of algae die and decay; decomposers consume dissolved oxygen, leading to oxygen depletion. Fish die-offs follow. Even without oxygen, certain bacteria produce foul-smelling gases. Polluted lakes thus become uninhabitable for many organisms. Acidification (from acid rain) is another serious threat that many lakes cannot withstand.

TERRESTRIAL OR LITHOSPHERIC ECOSYSTEM
Light, Nutrients and Water
The ecosystem present on land or soil is called terrestrial or lithospheric
ecosystem. Terrestrial ecosystem receives plenty of light, and the soil provides abundant
minerals. Water, however, is limited and very unevenly distributed both in space and in
time. Factors which influence life on land are given below:

Temperature: Favorable temperatures are very unevenly distributed on
land in place and time. At the poles, the average temperature is below freezing; in temperate
zones, only during certain seasons of the year is it favorable; but in tropical zones a warm, moist climate is present.

Air: In terrestrial ecosystems, air is in constant motion; its composition is more or less uniform. The amount of O₂ and CO₂ in air is critical for respiration and photosynthesis.

Adaptations for Terrestrial Ecosystem
Plants and animals shifting from water to land developed adaptations for land habitat, e.g. seeds, supporting tissues, and mechanisms to conserve water.

Supporting tissues: Both plants and animals have evolved supporting tissues like
vascular bundles (xylem-phloem) in plants and skeleton in animals to support them on
land against the force of gravity.

Conservation of water: Plants and animals evolved various methods to conserve
water in their body (homeostasis). Mechanisms of temperature regulation were
developed by land plants and animals by developing bark and skin respectively.

Division of Terrestrial Ecosystem
It can be divided into the following main types:

Forest ecosystem. It is further sub-divided into:
(a) tropical rain forests
(b) temperate deciduous forests
(c) coniferous, alpine and boreal forests

Grassland ecosystem.

Desert ecosystem.

Tundra ecosystem.

SOME MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS IN PAKISTAN
Pakistan has a variety of seasons and climates ranging from hot dry plains to
cold snowy mountains. Some major ecosystems existing in Pakistan are:

Temperate Deciduous Forests — Shogran and Neelam valley.

Coniferous Alpine and Boreal Forests — Northern mountains of Pakistan (e.g., Kaghan, Chilas).

Grassland Ecosystem — Gilgit and Kashmir regions.

Desert Ecosystem — Thal, Cholistan, Thar, and other desert regions.

Temperate Deciduous Forests:
In Pakistan, temperate moist conditions are present in Neelam and Shogran. These forests originally covered India, Southeast Asia, eastern North America, Europe, China, Japan, and parts of Australia. Slightly farther from the equator, the rainfall is not nearly as constant, and there are pronounced seasons that mean distinct summer and winter seasons. During dry seasons trees cannot get enough water from the soil to compensate for evaporation from leaves. As a result, the plants have adapted to the dry season by shedding their leaves, minimizing water loss. If the rains fail to return on schedule, the trees delay leaf production until the drought passes.

Rainfall: The average rainfall is between 750 — 1500 mm.
Temperature: Moderate; ranges from 4°C — 30°C.
Plants: Some dominant plants are Taxus baccata, Pinus wallichiana, Berberis lyceum.
Many herbs and shrubs form a field layer. At the forest floor level many mosses, liverworts, and lichens covered with a litter layer are present.
Animal life: Some common animals are Macaca mulatta (rhesus monkey), Ursus thibetanus (black bear), Felis bengalensis (leopard cat), deer, and wolves — with various microorganisms to convert the litter into organic matter such as bacteria, fungi, and earthworms.

Coniferous Alpine and Boreal Forests
In Pakistan these forests are in upper Kaghan, Dir and Chilas, Malam Jabba in
Swat valley. Globally, they stretch across Eurasia and North America (Canada) just south of the tundra. Northern coniferous forests are also called Taiga. Conditions in taiga are harsher than those in the temperate deciduous forest. Winters are longer and colder, and the growing season is shorter. As a result, evergreen coniferous trees populate this type of forest, with small waxy needles. The waxy coating and small surface area of the needles reduce water loss by evaporation during cold months, and leaves remain on the trees year round. Coniferous forests located at high altitude are called alpine while those at high latitude are called boreal.

Climate: There is a constant cover of snow in some areas.
Temperature: May be below freezing point up to about 10°C in summer.
Vegetation and animals: Conifers such as Pinus wallichiana, Picea smithiana, Abies pindrow, etc. Animals include large mammals and smaller species adapted to cold.

Grassland Ecosystem
Grasslands in Pakistan are found in Gilgit, Kashmir, Waziristan, lower Chitral regions. In the world, large grasslands occur in central Eurasia (steppes), North America (prairies), and South America (pampas). Tropical grasslands are called savannas.

The grasslands usually face severe droughts. Annual rainfall varies widely (e.g., 250–750 mm); in tropical and subtropical grasslands, rainfall may reach about 1500 mm in some regions. Grasslands occur in regions where mean annual rainfall is intermediate between deserts and forests. They have a continuous cover of grass and virtually no trees except along rivers. Water and fire are crucial factors in competition between grasses and trees.

Dominant species: Grasses and grass-like plants (graminoids). Herbs such as composites, legumes and many other herbaceous plant species are associated with grasses.

Soil conditions: Soil moisture is moderate; soils of grasslands are often deep and fertile but can be impermeable in some layers.

Animals: Dominant species are herbivores; invertebrates including insects are very common. Predators include reptiles, amphibians and mammals. Large herbivores such as zebras, wild horses and bison are important in some grasslands.

Productivity: In temperate grassland the rate of primary production is moderate; in sub-humid tropical grassland it can be higher. Grazing animals consume a portion of primary production; invertebrates, rodents and birds may consume similar amounts.

Human impact: Natural grasslands are used for crop production and livestock management. Over-grazing causes reduction in herbage cover and results in soil erosion; many lands are converted into deserts by desertification.

Desert Ecosystem
In Pakistan desert ecosystems occur in western Punjab (Thal), southern Punjab (Fort Abbas, Bahawalnagar, Yazman, Bahawalpur/Cholistan, Khanpur, Rahim Yar Khan), and Sindh (Thar).

Deserts are found on every continent often around 20°–30° North and South latitude and in rain shadows of major mountain ranges. Some deserts receive virtually no rain (e.g., parts of Sahara or Atacama), while more common deserts have widely spaced vegetation and large areas of bare ground.

Rainfall: Less than 25–50 cm (10–20 inches) or none.
Plant life: Plants are often spaced evenly (bushes or cacti) with shallow, widespread root systems. Many have waterproof waxy coatings to prevent evaporation; succulents store water in thick stems.
Animal life: Animals are adapted to conserve water; many are nocturnal and shelter underground during the day. Small animals obtain water from food and metabolic processes; large animals (e.g., camels) depend on intermittent water sources.

Human impact: Human activities can accelerate desertification (spread of deserts), especially under conditions of overuse and climate stress (examples: Sahel).

Tundra
The tundra lies before reaching the polar ice-caps (Arctic tundra) — a vast treeless region bordering the Arctic Ocean. It describes vegetation types in treeless high latitudes between taiga and polar ice caps, and at high altitude across mountains above the timberline (e.g., Karakoram and Hindu Kush).

Plant and animal life: The ground is carpeted with small perennial flowers and dwarf willows, often with large lichens called reindeer moss. Standing pools provide habitat for mosquitoes and other insects that provide food for numerous migrating birds in summer. The tundra vegetation supports lemmings, which are eaten by wolves, snowy owls, arctic foxes and even bears.

Human impact: The tundra is perhaps the most fragile biome because of its short growing season. Human activities (oil drilling sites, pipelines, mines, military bases) leave scars that persist for centuries.

Humans and Ecosystems:
The expanding human population has left relatively few ecosystems undisturbed.
Our impact on natural ecosystems is diverse and wide-ranging. Ecosystems dominated by people tend to be simpler — fewer species and fewer community interactions than undisturbed ecosystems.