
DRM AND FUNCTIONS IN PLANTS
List the macro and micronutrients of plants highlighting the role of each nutrient. State the examples of carnivorous plants. Explain the role of stomata and palisade tissue in the exchange of gases in plants. Relate transpiration with gas exchange in plants. Describe the structure of xylem vessel elements, sieve tube elements, companion cells, tracheids and relate their structures with functions. Explain the movement of water between plant cells, and between the cells and their environment in terms of water potential. Explain the movement of water through roots in terms of symplast, apoplast and vacuolar pathways. Explain the movement of water in xylem through TACT mechanism. Describe the mechanisms involved in the opening and closing of stomata. Explain the movement of sugars within plants. Define osmotic adjustment. Explain movement of water into or out of cell in isotonic, hypotonic, and hypertonic conditions. Describe osmotic adjustments in hydrophytic (marine and freshwater), xerophytic and mesophytic plants. Explain the osmotic adjustments of plants in saline soils. List the adaptations of plants to cope with low and high temperatures. Explain the turgor pressure and explain its significance in providing support to herbaceous plants. Explain the structure of supporting tissues in plants. Define and explain primary and secondary growth in plants. State the role of apical meristem and lateral meristem in primary and secondary growth. State how annual rings are formed. List plant growth regulators. Describe the responses to light, force of gravity, touch and chemical.

This is probably due to less range of stimuli because plants, unlike animals, lead a static life and face comparatively less number of stimuli. However, plants must possess the essential functions, which are required for the survival such as specific nutritional requirements, exchange of gases, mechanisms by which they transport water, mineral and organic solutes, plant homeostasis, support, growth and development and various growth responses. This chapter deals with all these functions.

All those substances that provide necessary elements to the organism for growth and metabolism are called nutrients that may be organic or inorganic. The term nutrition is applied to all the processes that are involved in uptake of nutrients from the environment and their utilization in growth or various metabolic activities of the body. Plants are autotrophs as they obtain inorganic nutrients such as water, carbon dioxide and certain minerals from the environment and convert them into organic compounds.

Plant Nutrients, their Entry and Deficiencies
Sixteen elements have been found essential for plant growth. Nine of these are required in fairly large quantities and are therefore known as macronutrients. These include carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sulphur, calcium and magnesium. The remaining seven elements are needed in traces or small amounts for normal plant growth and development that are known as micronutrients. These include iron, boron, manganese, copper, molybdenum, chlorine and zinc.

Table: Mineral nutrition in plants
Nutrient Major Functions
Nitrogen Component of carbohydrates, lipids, protein and nucleic acid molecules
Phosphorus Component of proteins, nucleic acids, chlorophyll and enzymes
Potassium Component of nucleic acids, phospholipids, ATP and NADP.
Calcium Component of cell wall, involved in membrane permeability, enzyme activator.
Magnesium Component of chlorophyll, acts as enzyme activator
Sulphur Component of certain amino acids and vitamins.
Potassium Ionic balance, opening and closing of stomata, enzyme activator.
Iron Involved in photosynthesis.
Boron Component of cytochromes, ferredoxin, involved in photosynthesis.
Manganese Component of chlorophyll and other pigments.

The deficiency of an essential nutrient in the plant body therefore results in the appearance of certain symptoms that are generally called deficiency symptoms. For example, deficiency of magnesium causes yellowing and deficiency of phosphorus causes stunted root growth and yellow or purple color. Deficiency of potassium causes leaf margin yellowing and pre-mature death of plant. The nutrients may become deficient particularly if the same crop is grown again and again in the same soil. Therefore, crop rotation (cultivation of different crops alternatively in the same soil) or addition of fertilizers in the required quantity of specific nutrients are possible remedies for this problem. The table shows the major functions of each macro and micronutrient of the plant.

The major symptoms of mineral deficiencies in plants are necrosis, chlorosis, and stunted growth. Necrosis is the death of a part of plant body. It is due to deficiency of calcium, magnesium, copper and molybdenum. Chlorosis is the yellowing of green parts of plant which show lack of chlorophyll due to mineral deficiency of nitrogen, iron, and magnesium. Stunted growth is less than normal growth due to deficiency of phosphorus, sulphur, potassium in plants. The leaves of insectivorous plants are true photosynthetic autotrophs but they eat insects because they usually grow in places where nitrogenous salts are not available e.g., marshy areas. Actually, they use insects and other small animals as a source of nitrogen. Such plants have some modified leaves that can catch and digest insects. These plants also have certain symbiotic bacteria which help digest insect proteins. The examples are Pitcher plant, Venus fly trap.

GAS EXCHANGE IN PLANTS
We have studied that respiration occurs at cellular level. At organismic level, the respiration that occurs at organismic level is called gaseous exchange. The purpose of this gaseous exchange is to enable the cells to carry out respiration, which utilizes oxygen and releases carbon dioxide during the breakdown of complex organic compounds. Exchange of gases between organism and environment is carried out by diffusion. In the absence of special organs, every cell itself carries out the exchanges of oxygen and carbon dioxide according to its need. This exchange of gases mainly occurs through two main openings, the stomata and lenticels.

Role of Palisade and Spongy Mesophyll in Exchange of Gases
Mesophyll are special types of parenchymatous cells (thin walled living cells) which are present between the two epidermal layers of leaves. These cells are modified to carry out photosynthesis. There are two types of mesophyll in dicot and monocot leaves. In dicots, there are two distinct layers of mesophyll, the palisade mesophyll and the spongy mesophyll. The palisade mesophyll are elongated and compactly packed cells with no intercellular spaces between them. The epidermis beside palisade mesophyll is called upper epidermis. On the other hand, spongy mesophyll are loosely packed cell with large intercellular spaces. The epidermis beside spongy mesophyll is called lower epidermis. Such leaves, in which upper and lower epidermises can be differentiated because of the presence of two types of mesophyll cells, are called bifacial leaves. In monocots, the leaves are monofacial as only spongy mesophyll cells are present between both epidermises. The mesophyll cells are metabolically active cells of the plant therefore; they are rapidly involved in exchange of gases. The passage for this exchange of gases through mesophyll tissue is provided by the stomata.

Relationship of Stomata and Transpiration with Exchange of Gases
Stomata are present in both epidermises. Transpiration is the loss of water in the form of vapours through aerial parts of plant mainly through the stomata. It is not only responsible for the uptake of water and minerals but also plays a vital role in the exchange of gases between plant and environment. When the stomata are widely open they provide a wide passage for the exchange of gases between plant and environment.

In daytime, plants are involved in both photosynthesis and respiration but rate of photosynthesis is greater than the rate of respiration. Therefore, pattern of gaseous exchange is different in day and night. In daytime, since the rate of photosynthesis is much faster than the rate of respiration, so the carbon dioxide released from respiration does not fulfill the photosynthetic need. Hence, plants import carbon dioxide from the environment primarily. The oxygen released from photosynthesis is much more than the need of respiration; hence, it is exported out of the plant body.

At night, plants begin to perform exchange of gases just like animals i.e., they absorb oxygen and release carbon dioxide to the environment as no photosynthesis takes place. The oxygen required for respiration is absorbed from environment and the carbon dioxide produced from respiration is released outside.

At the time of dawn (sunrise) and dusk (sunset) the rate of photosynthesis becomes equal to the rate of respiration due to low intensity of light. In this situation, the carbon dioxide released from respiration is sufficient to carry on photosynthesis and the oxygen released from photosynthesis is consumed in respiration. Therefore, the net gaseous exchange between plant and environment is completely stopped. This is known as compensation point of photosynthesis.

TRANSPORT IN PLANTS
The roots not only anchor the plant body in the soil but also absorb water and minerals through root epidermal cells. The absorption of water and minerals take place by osmosis. The term osmosis is defined as the movement of water from the region of its higher concentration to the region of its lower concentration through semipermeable membrane. The movement of water into the cell is called endosmosis while the movement of water out of the cell is called exosmosis. The movement of water into or out of the cell exhibits three kinds of water potentials: water potential, solute potential and pressure potential.

Water potential is a measure of the potential energy in water that enables it to move from one region to another. Potential is denoted by the Greek letter ψ (psi) and is measured in units of pressure called Mega Pascal (MPa). In plants, water potential is represented by Ψ. Water potential of a medium is directly proportional to the concentration of water in that medium; therefore, pure water has highest water potential. Water potential of pure water is designated a value of zero. Water potential of solutions or the cells must be less than zero i.e., in negative range.

The water potential of solutions is mainly influenced by solute concentration and atmospheric pressure. Water potential can be broken down into its components using the following equation: Ψ = Ψs + Ψp. As individual components change, they raise or lower the total water potential of a system. When this happens, water moves to equilibrate, moving from the system or compartment with a higher water potential to the system or compartment with a lower water potential. Therefore, for water to move through the plant from the soil to the air (a process called transpiration), the conditions must exist as such: Ψ of soil > Ψ of root > Ψ of stem > Ψ of leaf > Ψ of atmosphere.

Solute potential (Ψs): Solutes reduce water potential by consuming some of the potential energy available in water. This measure of decrease in water potential of a medium due to the addition of solutes is called solute potential. Solute potential is negative in a plant cell and zero in distilled water. In other words, the amount of available potential energy is reduced when solutes are added to an aqueous system. Thus, Ψs decreases with increasing solute. The internal water potential of a plant cell is more negative than pure water because of cytoplasm's high solute content. Because of this difference in water potential, water will move from the soil into a plant's root cells via the process of osmosis. This is why solute potential is sometimes called osmotic potential.

Pressure potential (Ψp): When pressure in addition to atmospheric pressure is applied to pure water or a solution, its water potential increases. It is equivalent to pumping water from one place to another. In a living system, when water enters the plant cells by osmosis, pressure increases inside the cell making the cell turgid and increasing the water potential. This increase in water potential of a medium due to the addition of water or due to the increase in atmospheric pressure is called pressure potential.

Pathways of Water Uptake by Roots
The root epidermal cells are freely permeable to water and other minerals while cortical cells are differentially permeable. From root hairs water enters the epidermal cells. Then water moves along the concentration gradient. It passes through cortex, endodermis, pericycle and reaches the xylem vessels. There are three pathways taken by water to reach the xylem tissues: (a) The apoplast pathway, (b) The symplast pathway, (c) The vacuolar pathway.

Apoplast pathway: The apoplast is the system of adjacent cell walls, which is continuous throughout the plant. When water moving through spaces in the cell walls reaches the endodermis, its passage is stopped by casparian strips (a band of suberin and lignin bordering four sides of the endodermal cells). This is called apoplast pathway.

Symplast pathway: Movement of cell sap that involves cytoplasmic connection of adjacent cells is termed symplast pathway. The symplast is the system of interconnected protoplast in the plant. The cytoplasm of neighbouring protoplast is linked by the plasmodesmata. Once water and any solutes it contains is taken into the cytoplasm of one cell it can move through the symplast without having to cross further membranes. Movement might be aided by cytoplasmic streaming. The symplast is an important pathway of water movement.

Vacuolar pathway: In the vacuolar pathway water moves from vacuole to vacuole through neighbouring cells, crossing the symplast and apoplast in the process and moving through membranes and tonoplast by osmosis. It moves down a water potential gradient.

Structure and Function of Xylem and Phloem
There are two types of conducting tissues in plants, namely xylem and phloem. Xylem conducts water and minerals from the roots to the upper parts of the plants. Phloem conducts organic food from the leaves to the other parts.

Types of xylem and their functions: Xylem is a complex and permanent tissue that consists of four cell types: the tracheids, vessel elements, xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma. Tracheids are dead, elongated cells with tapering ends and lignified walls. They have mechanical strength and give support and help in conduction of water and minerals. These cells are universally present in xylem of all vascular plants, which are therefore, called tracheophytes. Xylem vessels are dead, very long, highly thick walled tubular structures formed by the fusion of several vessel elements end to end in a row. Vessel elements are shorter than tracheids but work as a pipeline in plant body as they are placed one above the other. Xylem vessels are found in angiosperms where they are involved in conduction of water and minerals and also provide mechanical support to the body. Xylem fibres are also dead but narrow, highly elongated, highly thick walled cells with tapering ends. They are mainly responsible for mechanical support to the plant body. The only living cells of xylem are xylem parenchyma, which are thin walled, broad cells and are involved in the storage of water and minerals temporarily during conduction.

Types of phloem and their functions: Phloem is a complex and permanent tissue that consists of four cell types: the sieve tube elements, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres (bast fibres). Sieve tubes are the long tube like structures, which translocate solution of organic solutes (sucrose) from leaves to other parts of body. These are formed by the end-to-end fusion of cells called sieve tube elements. Sieve tube elements are thin walled living cells but do not have nuclei; actually, their nuclei are lost as they mature. These cells are narrow at the centre and wide at the ends. A transverse or oblique pore bearing partition, the sieve plate, separates two successive sieve tube elements. Due to the absence of nuclei, the functions of sieve tube elements are controlled by adjacent companion cells. The sieve elements and companion cells, together form a functional unit that act as conducting channels and are involved in transport of organic solutes. Companion cells provide energy to sieve tube elements for their activities. Like xylem tissue, phloem also possesses parenchyma and fibre cells. Phloem parenchyma are storage cells and phloem fibres are very much thick walled supporting cells.

Ascent of Sap
Water and minerals are absorbed by the root epidermal cells from soil from where these substances are first moved to the root xylem cells and then to the leaves. This upward movement of water and dissolved mineral from root to the leaves through xylem tissue is called ascent of sap. Since this movement occurs against the gravity therefore, a considerable force is required to conduct water and minerals in tall heighted plants. The most acceptable theory that explains this movement is generally called TACT theory.

According to this theory, four factors such as Transpiration pull, Adhesion, Cohesion and Tension (TACT) are combined to form a collective force that is mainly responsible for ascent of sap.

Transpiration pull: When stomata are open, the water molecules move from the region of high potential (surface of leaves) to a region of low potential (in the air). This evaporation in the same way pulls the water column from the xylem tissue. This force is called transpiration pull.

Adhesion is the attractive force between water molecules and other substances. Since both water and xylem cells are polar molecules so there is a strong attractive force for water within the narrow capillaries of the xylem. Adhesion of water molecule to the wall of xylem cells assists upward movement of the xylem sap counteracting the downward gravity. Adhesion also helps to hold water in the xylem when transpiration is not occurring.

Water molecules attract one another, forming weak hydrogen bonds. This attraction among water molecules is called cohesion and the hydrogen bonds formed between them are termed as cohesion bonds.

Mechanism of TACT force: The column of water molecule within the xylem is at least as strong and unbreakable as a steel wire of the same diameter. Hydrogen bonds among water molecules provide the cohesion that holds together the string of water through the entire height of the plant within the xylem. As long as transpiration continues water is pulled upward as one molecule. The bulk flow of water to the apex of its path is driven by solar energy since evaporation from leaves is responsible for transpiration.

Opening and Closing of Stomata
We have studied the structure and distribution of stomata. Stomata are open in day and close at night. The opening and closing of stomata is regulated by the turgidity of guard cells. When guard cells are turgid, stomata are open and when they are flaccid, the stomata are closed. There are two theories for opening and closing of stomata: (i) Photosynthesis theory, (ii) K+ ions influx/efflux theory.

Photosynthesis theory: When guard cells are exposed to light, the process of photosynthesis is started. As the concentration of glucose is increased, the solute potential and water potential of guard cells become more negative. Since, the surrounding epidermal cells have high water potential, the water begins to move from surrounding epidermal cells to the guard cells. The entry of water into the guard cells makes them turgid and thus, stomata are opened. In the evening when the process of photosynthesis is stopped, the concentration of glucose is decreased because some glucose has been consumed in respiratory activities of guard cells, some of it is transformed into sucrose so that it can be transported to other parts, and the remaining glucose is converted into insoluble starch and is stored for later use. The decrease in glucose concentration causes an increase in water potential of the guard cells. In this way, water begins to move from guard cells to surrounding epidermal cells. Due to loss of water guard cells become flaccid, thus stomata are closed.

K+ ions Influx/efflux theory: According to this theory, the start of photosynthetic activity in the morning when plant is exposed to light, causes a decrease in level of CO2 in the guard cells. Low level of CO2 favours or stimulates the influx (inward movement) of K+ ions into the guard cells from the surrounding epidermal cells by active transport. At the same time, malic acid is ionized into malate ions and H+ ions due to the exposure of blue light (a part of visible light). The accumulation of H+ ions causes decrease in pH of guard cells, which are then pumped to surrounding epidermal cells in order to maintain the pH of guard cells. The incoming K+ ions are combined with malate ions to form potassium malate which is highly soluble in water thus decreases the water potential of the guard cells. In this way water begins to move from surrounding epidermal cells to guard cells. The entry of water into the guard cells makes them turgid and thus, stomata are opened. In the evening, the photosynthetic activity is stopped and level of CO2 rises in guard cells. High level of CO2 favours or stimulates the efflux (outward movement) of K+ ions from the guard cells into the surrounding epidermal cells by active transport. At the same time, malic acid is reformed by the combination of malate ions and H+ ions in the absence of blue light now. Due to the absence of potassium malate, water potential of the guard cells are increased. In this way, water begins to move from guard cells to surrounding epidermal cells. The loss of water from the guard cells makes them flaccid thus stomata are closed.

Translocation of Organic Solutes
The movement of prepared food (organic solutes) to different parts of the plant body through phloem tissue is called translocation of organic solutes.

Source and sink or direction of translocation: Unlike ascent of sap, this movement cannot be characterized as upward or downward because prepared food is to move to different directions. Therefore, in order to describe direction of this movement it is usually said that translocation always occurs from a source to a sink. The term source is applied to the area of supply of food such as food preparing organ or storage organ (when it supplies the food). The term sink is used for area of utilization of food such as metabolizing organ or storage organ (when it stores the food). A leaf is purely a source while fruit is particularly a sink; on the other hand root and stem act as both source and sink.

Composition of translocating fluid (Phloem sap): Analysis of phloem sap have revealed that it consists of 10-25% dry matter out of which 90% is sucrose (cane sugar), while remaining are other organic and inorganic substances.

Mechanism of translocation: Pressure flow or mass flow theory explains the mechanism of translocation of organic solutes. According to this theory, the sugars produced at a source, such as photosynthesizing leaves or storage organ are actively loaded by the companion cells. The increase in concentration of sugars in the phloem, lowers its water potential, thus water will enter by osmosis from the xylem cells. This increases the hydrostatic pressure in the phloem cells, which pushes forcibly the sugary solution away from the leaf (source). The pressure gradient from source to sink causes translocation from the area of higher hydrostatic pressure (the source) to the area of lower hydrostatic pressure (the sink). When this solution is reached to the sink such as roots, the root cells running actively absorb the organic solutes from this solution. The loss of solutes in the phloem sap causes an increase in water potential so the water from the phloem flows back to the xylem tubes.

HOMEOSTASIS IN PLANTS
Homeostasis is the ability to maintain a steady state within a constantly changing environment that contributes towards the success of living systems. The outer environmental conditions such as water availability, nutrients and temperature often show fluctuations that also affect these components within plant body. Plants have several adaptations to cope with these challenges. Here you are going to learn about osmotic adjustment (osmoregulation) and thermoregulation in plants.

Osmotic Adjustment (Osmoregulation)
The maintenance of water and solute level in the body is called osmotic adjustment or osmoregulation. Water and solute relations establish three types of osmotic situations: isotonic, hypotonic and hypertonic.

Different osmotic conditions cause different effects upon net movement of water in and out of the cells. If a cell is kept in a medium which has higher water potential and lower solute concentration than cell sap, the water begin to move from medium to the cell (endosmosis) and the cell becomes turgid. Such medium is called hypotonic medium. On the other hand, if a cell is kept in a medium which has lower water potential and higher solute concentration than cell sap, the water begin to move from cell to the medium (exosmosis) and cell becomes plasmolysed. Such medium is called hypertonic medium. Both hypotonic and hypertonic type of conditions compel for osmotic adjustment. The ideal situation for a cell is isotonic in which water potential of the cell and outer environment is equal, therefore, there is no net movement of water in or out of the cell. However, this situation is rarely available to the plants.

Osmotic Adjustments in Plants of Different Environment
On the basis of availability of water, plants are classified into hydrophytes, mesophytes and xerophytes. Each group is exposed to different osmotic conditions therefore, show different osmotic adjustments.

Hydrophytes: The plants that are found in the area where abundant water is available, are called hydrophytes. Such plants are adapted to deal with flooding (excess of water). Such plants show very high rate of transpiration due to broad leaves with distribution of stomata on both sides of leaf, which are generally open in day and close at night. These plants store a very small amount of water, have thin cuticle or almost none, on their surface.

Mesophytes: The plants that are found in the area where moderate supply of water is available are called mesophytes. Common crop plants such as wheat, rice corn are example of such plants. These plants are exposed in nearly isotonic conditions so face no drastic problem of flooding (excess of water) or dehydration (deficiency of water). Such plants show moderate rate of transpiration due to medium sized leaves with distribution of stomata on lower surface, which are generally open in day and close at night. However, these plants can close their stomata even in day. These plants store a small amount of water, have very thin cuticle on their surface. In tropical climates, many tall plants shut stomata during the hot days and open at night.

Xerophytes: The plants that are found in the area where very little amount of water is available are called xerophytes. Desert plants such as cactus, opuntia are example of such plants. These plants are exposed to severely hypertonic conditions so face extreme degree of dehydration. Such plants show very reduced rate of transpiration due to narrow needle like leaves or due to complete modification of leaves into spines. They have stomata in depressions (sunken stomata), which are generally close in day and open at night. These plants store a very high amount of water therefore; they are also called succulent plants. They have very thick cuticle on their surface.

Osmotic Adjustment in Saline Soils
Saline soils are characterized by the presence of excessive salt concentration e.g., in coastal areas and salt marshes. Saline soils due to very low water potential i.e., plants are unable to absorb water even water is available near the root zone. The plants living in saline environments (halophytes) have adaptations to store or excrete salt to cope with this problem. Many halophytes are adapted to salinity by taking up sodium and chloride at high rates and then storing these ions in the vacuoles of the leaf cells, keeping the salt concentration in the cytoplasm at a low level that does not interfere with the functions of their metabolic machinery of their leaves. These plants use the accumulated salt for osmotic adjustment to the low water potential in the soil. On the other hand some halophytes do not uptake salts from soil; instead, they make osmotic adjustment by accumulating their own dissolved substances compatible with enzymes function. These "compatible solutes" are mostly organic compounds such as the amino acids glycine and, in some plants, sugar alcohols, such as sorbitol.

Thermoregulation in Plants
All organisms for optimum activity of their enzymes require a suitable temperature. Thermoregulation is a type of homeostasis by which an organism is able to perform necessary adjustments in response to low and high temperature stress. Plants also have certain adaptations that enable them to tolerate against low and high temperature changes.

Adaptations in plants to cope with the low temperature stress: Low temperature affects the fluidity of cell membrane because lipids of the membranes are frozen into crystalline structures, thus membranes become porous which affect the entry of solutes. The structure of membrane proteins is also affected. In addition, freezing temperature causes ice crystal formation with in cytoplasm that interferes with the metabolism. In order to prevent crystallization in cell membrane, plants increase the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids (which have low freezing point), which help membrane to maintain fluidity at low temperature and the crystal formation is inhibited. In order to prevent crystal formation in cytoplasm, the plants native to cold regions such as oaks, maples, roses bring changes in solute compositions of the cells which causes lowering of freezing point, although ice crystals may form in the cell wall. So adaptation to low temperature stress require time because of a rapid drop in air temperature is more stressful than gradual drop in air temperature.

Adaptations in plants to cope with the high temperature stress: High temperature causes excessive evaporative loss of water by transpiration and ultimately wilting (loss of turgor). It also causes denaturation of enzymes and damages the metabolism therefore, harms or kills the plants. In hot areas, the plants develop a shiny cuticle, which reflects much of the incident light, thus preventing heat absorption and overheating by the plant. The leaves contain numerous openings, which allow the loss of water (transpiration), and remove the heat from the plant. However, very high temperature i.e., above 45°C, plants close their stomata to prevent the water loss. Therefore, most plants have adapted to survive in such high temperature stress situations by synthesizing large quantities of special proteins called heat shock proteins. Since these proteins are heat tolerant, so they embrace enzymes and other proteins thus help prevent denaturation.

SUPPORT IN PLANTS
When the life started on land from water, one of the very important needs for the organisms was to gain some sort of support and strength for keeping their bodies in shapes. Plants also have variety of mechanism for support such as turgor mechanism in parenchyma cells, mechanical tissues (thick walled e.g., collenchyma and sclerenchyma), arrangement of vascular bundles and secondary growth.

Role of Turgor Mechanism in Support
In plants the parenchyma cells have large central vacuoles, which are filled with water. The water causes pressure on the surrounding walls, when the cells are turgid. This pressure on the walls keeps the cells, stiff and hard and is called turgor pressure. In herbaceous plants where the specialized supporting tissues are not common, the turgidity of the cells provides support and strength and it grows uprightly.

Role of Mechanical Tissues in Support
The term mechanical tissues is used for the tissues of thick walled cells i.e., collenchyma and sclerenchyma. Collenchyma: The collenchyma is characterized by the extra cellulose deposition at the corners of these cells. It is a mechanical tissue which provides support particularly in young parts of plant. Sclerenchyma: It plays more important role in support because they are present in mature plants. Sclerenchyma tissues are solely meant to provide strength and mechanical strength for the plant body. The mature cells are dead due to the deposition of very thick secondary lignified wall. Sclerenchyma is of two types, i.e., fibres and sclereids. Fibres are elongated cells and sclereids are roughly spherical or variously shaped cells otherwise both have heavily thickened walls with lignin. Fibres also have great tensile strength. Fibres are found in the pericycle of stems forming a solid rod of tissue. Fibres also occur in xylem and phloem tissues. Sclereids are common in fruit wall and seed coats.

Arrangement of Vascular Bundles
In dicot plants, vascular bundles are arranged in the form of ring in stem. As compared to monocot plants in which vascular bundles are scattered in the stem, the ring arrangement of vascular bundle in dicot plants also provide support to the plant body.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN PLANTS
Development is a programmed series of changes by which an organism is converted from a simple form to that is more complex. The growth is part of development process and defined as an irreversible increase in the size and mass of an organism. In plants growth involves four phases: cell division (production of new cells), cell enlargement (increase in size of cells), cell differentiation (modification of cells for particular functions). Plants add new organs like, branches, leaves, flowers and fruits continuously. This unique pattern is called continuous growth.

Meristematic Tissues (Meristems)
In higher plants, entire plant body is capable of growing, but in higher plants, growth is confined to the meristematic tissues or growing points that possess specialized tissues for growth. Such tissues are called meristematic tissues or meristems. The cells remain forever young and divide continuously. The new cells replace the old cells of the plant in these tissues. When a meristematic cell divides in two, one cell remains in the meristem is called an initial, and the other is called the derivative. By repeated mitotic divisions of the initial cells add new cells, the derivatives are pushed further and further away from the zone of active division. They stretch, enlarge and differentiate into other types of tissues as they mature. Meristematic cells are generally small and cuboidal with large nuclei, small vacuoles, and thin walls. A plant has two major kinds of meristems: the apical meristem and lateral meristem.

Apical meristems: These are located at the tips of roots and shoots. Cell divisions and subsequent cellular enlargement in these areas lengthen the above and below ground parts of the plant. Since, these meristems are present in plants right from embryonic life, therefore, they are also known as primary meristems.

Lateral meristems: Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells on lateral sides in stems and roots of dicots and gymnosperms and increase their thickness and diameter. These meristems are derived from apical meristem after embryonic life therefore; they are also called secondary meristem. Vascular cambium, cork cambium, and intercalary meristem are the types of lateral meristems. Some plants grow in diameter by producing new tissues laterally from a cylinder of tissue called the vascular cambium, which extends throughout the length of the plant from roots to buds. Intercalary meristems are separated from them and are usually located at the bases of leaves or internodes. They give rise side branches, leaf and floral buds and cease activity after these organs have attained certain size. Tissues produced by cell divisions of the apical meristem are called primary tissues.

Primary and Secondary Growth
There are two types of plant growth: Primary growth and secondary growth. When a plant starts its life after germination of seed, it begins to increase its length first. The increase in length of root and shoot is therefore, called primary growth. It remains continuous throughout the life of a plant however the rate of growth may vary in different periods of life. It is carried out by the cell division in apical meristem. The increase in thickness and diameter of a plant is called secondary growth. This is found in stems and roots of dicots and gymnosperms where it contributes a significant portion of the plant body. All the tissues that are produced during secondary growth are called secondary tissues. Similarly, the tissues that are already present in plant before the secondary growth are called primary tissues.

Role of Lateral Meristems in Secondary Growth
Lateral meristems i.e., cork cambium and vascular cambium mainly participates in secondary growth. After primary growth by the activity of apical meristem, vascular cambium is formed in vascular bundle between primary xylem and primary phloem. Its activity is faster than cork cambium therefore it contributes more tissues in secondary growth. It produces two new tissues in plant body: secondary xylem (towards its inner side) and secondary phloem (towards its outer side). The rate of production of secondary xylem is greater than secondary phloem and it is produced in two different ways during the autumn and winter seasons, comparatively smaller sized cells are formed while in spring and summer seasons, larger sized cells are produced. Because of this differential growth pattern, annual rings are formed which are also called growth rings. You can determine the age of plant by counting the number of growth rings. Cork cambium generally originates from outer most layer of primary cortex and produces secondary cortex (towards its inner side) and cork (towards its outer side beneath the epidermis). The cork cells become dead due to which epidermis also becomes dead. Therefore, the bark of mature trees looks rough.

During secondary growth, the bulk of tissues added by vascular cambium is mainly secondary xylem. This entire mass of secondary xylem is called wood. The inner region of wood (older secondary xylem, primary xylem and central pith) is blocked by the deposition of tannins and other substances in later life and therefore gives a dark appearance. It is called heart wood. However, the outer region of wood (that includes only secondary xylem) remain functional and gives a light appearance. It is called sap wood. The outer region of stem from vascular cambium to outside is called bark. The portion of bark inner to the cork cambium is called inner bark (secondary phloem, primary phloem, pericycle, endodermis, primary cortex and secondary cortex) while the portion outer to the cork cambium is called outer bark (cork and epidermis).

Growth Correlations
During the development of a plant, the rate of growth of different growing points is not constant, for example, growth rate of root and shoot is different. Growth of different meristem sometime influence upon each other. Such interactions among different growing points are called growth correlations. These growth correlations may be positive (if growth of one part promotes the growth of other part) or negative (if growth of one part inhibits the growth of other part).

Apical dominance is a kind of negative growth correlation in which the presence of a growing apical bud inhibits the growth of lateral buds. It is also found in roots where growth of lateral roots is inhibited by growth of the main root. The plants showing tall height with short side branches have strong apical dominance and the plants showing short main axis with dense growth of lateral branches have very weak apical dominance. The botanists performed several experiments to study the phenomenon of apical dominance and finally concluded that it is the auxin (a plant growth regulator) produced by apical buds that inhibits growth of lateral buds (another plant growth regulator) produced by lateral buds that promotes growth of lateral buds thus neutralizes the influence of apical dominance.

GROWTH RESPONSES IN PLANTS
The plants generally adjust themselves to changing environment by growth. The changes in growth and functions are often regulated by plant hormones (growth substances). These plant growth substances mediate the plant's response to environmental factors. The plant hormones act at the level of cells to regulate cell division, enlargement or cell maturation.

Plant Growth Regulators
Growth activities are co-ordinated by chemicals commonly known as plant hormones, which can move from their sites of synthesis to the sites of action, and because their effects depend primarily on some aspect of growth, they are called growth regulators. Five major types of plant growth regulators are recognized (a) auxins (b) gibberellins (c) cytokinins (d) abscisic acid (e) ethylene. Auxins, gibberellins and cytokinins are called growth promoters because of their ability to promote growth while abscisic acid and ethylene are called growth inhibitors. An auxin or indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), was the first plant hormone identified. It is manufactured primarily in the shoot tips (in leaf primordia and young leaves), in embryos, and in parts of developing flowers and seeds. They are mainly responsible for cell elongation.

Gibberellins: The gibberellins are widespread throughout the plant kingdom, and more than 75 have been isolated, to date. Rather than giving each a specific name, the compounds are numbered, for example, GA1, GA2, and so on. Gibberellic acid 3 (GA3) is the most widely and most thoroughly studied. The gibberellins are especially abundant in seeds and young shoots where they control stem elongation by stimulating both cell division and cell elongation.

Cytokinins: Cytokinins are so named because of their role in cell division (cytokinesis). Naturally occurring zeatin, isolated first from corn kernels is the most active of the cytokinins. Cytokinins are found in sites of active cell division, for example, in root tips, seeds, fruits, and leaves.

Abscisic acid: Abscisic acid is an inhibitor of growth. It accumulates in developing seeds and dormant buds.

Ethylene: Ethylene is a simple gaseous hydrocarbon produced from an amino acid. It is produced by fruits and other parts of the plants as well. Ethylene stimulates the ripening of fruits.

Tropic Movements
Plants do not show locomotion, but the individual organs show movements towards or away from certain external stimuli such as light, force of gravity, touch and chemical. In this section, you are going to learn about tropic movements: phototropism, geotropism, thigmotropism, chemotropism, photoperiodism and vernalization.

Phototropism is the movement of plants parts, either towards (positive) or away from light source. Such movements are found in shoots and roots. Shoots show positive phototropism (grow upward above the ground) and roots show negative phototropism (grow downward under the ground).

Geotropism (gravitropism) is the movement of plants parts, either towards (positive) or away from force of gravity. Such movements are also found in shoots and roots. Shoots show negative geotropism (grow upward above the ground) and roots show positive geotropism (grow downward under the ground).

Thigmotropism is the movement due to the touch stimulus. Such movements are shown by climbing plants that require any supportive structure such as a wall, a wooden stick or even a rope to climb over.

Chemotropism in which the stimulus is a chemical (nutrients). Such movement is shown by fungal mycelium in which hyphae show more growth towards the nutrients.

Photoperiodism
Light exerts influence on living organisms through variation in intensity, quality and duration. Total length of light in the whole day is called photoperiod and its effect on the flowering behavior in some plants is called photoperiodism. This behavior is found in many plants. For example, due to the exposure of appropriate photoperiod their vegetative buds are changed into floral buds and the flowers are begin to produce. If such plants do not get appropriate photoperiod their vegetative growth remains continue but flowers are not produced.

Classification of plants based upon photoperiodism: Plants are classified into three main groups on the basis of how photoperiodism affects flowering. Short day plants: These plants flower when the photoperiod is less than a critical length e.g., cocklebur, chrysanthemum etc. Long day plants: These plants flower when the photoperiod is greater than a critical length e.g., spinach, radish, pea, rose, etc. Day neutral plants: Flowering in these plants is not affected by variation in day length or darkness e.g., tomato, cucumber, etc.

Concept of critical length of photoperiod for both long day and short day plants: The critical length of photoperiod is not fixed; it is variable for every plant even they belong to same group. For example, for cocklebur and soybean 14 hours photoperiod is seemed to be critical however both are short day plants. Actually, the relative proportion of two forms of phytochromes in plant body determines the critical photoperiod. Critical photoperiod for short day plant can be defined as the maximum length of day, which is required to stimulate/induce flowering. Examples have already been given. Similarly, critical photoperiod for long day plant can be defined as the minimum length of day, which is required to stimulate/induce flowering in long day plant. For example, for henbane 11 hours photoperiod is critical.

Importance of dark periods over photoperiods: It has been discovered that the actual stimulus for flowering is the uninterrupted length of night rather than the light period. Therefore, it is really the length of dark period which is critical. For example, if a short day plant (e.g., cocklebur) is grown in appropriate short days (8 hours light) but its long nights (more than 8.5 hours) are interrupted by short light pulses, flowering is prevented. Similarly, a long day plant (e.g., henbane) can flower in inappropriate short days (less than 11 hours), if its long nights or dark periods (more than 13 hours) are interrupted. Therefore, the short day plants are actually long night plants and long day plants are short-night plants.

Quality of light and discovery of phytochromes: Night interruption experiments on short day and long day plants have revealed that besides dark length the quality (wavelengths) of light is also important in promotion or inhibition of flowering. For example, cocklebur a short day plant, will not flower if its long nights are interrupted but experiments revealed that red light (660 nm wavelength) was effective in inhibiting flowering whereas far red light (730 nm wavelength) reversed the effect of red light. This means that if more than one type of light exposures were given to interrupt long night, the final light treatment always determines the response. The behaviour of long day plants is opposite to these experiments. On the basis of above observation, researchers concluded that there must be some kind of photoreceptor pigments due to which plants respond differently to these lights. This struggle led to the discovery of these photoreceptor pigments in the form of phytochromes.

Photoperiodism and phytochromes: Flowering depends upon the rate of interconversion and relative proportion of two forms of phytochromes in plant body.

Interconversion and action of phytochromes: Phytochrome is a blue green leaf pigment that alternately exists in two forms: Pr (Phytochrome red) absorbs red light (of 660 nm wave length) and is converted to Pfr (Phytochrome far-red) absorbs far-red light (of 730 nm wave length) and is converted to Pr. The sunlight contains more red light than far-red light; therefore Pfr is present more in plants during the day. Far-red light are invisible heat radiations that are present in both day and night, but conversion of Pfr to Pr occurs mainly at night. The rate of conversion (Pfr to Pr) provides a biological clock to plants to determine the length of their night. A short day plant requires a low ratio of Pfr to Pr at the end of night. Nights longer than critical length results in conversion of more Pfr to Pr so the Pfr to Pr ratio becomes low. A long day plant requires a high ratio of Pfr to Pr at the end of night. Nights shorter than critical length results in less conversion of Pfr to Pr so the Pfr to Pr ratio become high.

Flowering hormone: At appropriate ratios of Pfr to Pr at the end of nights, leaves of plants produce a particular hormone in plants known as florigen, which transfers to the buds, thus flowers are produced.

Vernalization
By exposure to low temperature is necessary for flowering in some plants. Such plants are called biennial plants e.g., cabbage, carrot, beet, etc. For example, a biennial plant, which is sown in October of a year, will flower in March or April of the next year. If it is sown in February of same year, it will show vegetative growth but will not flower. However, in March, if its seeds are exposed to several weeks of low temperature, they will flower in same year. The requirement of low temperature period is absolutely necessary for flowering. Vernalization involves production of very low amount of gibberellin, which converts vegetative buds to the floral bud thus flower are produced. The vernalin is actually gibberellin.

PRACTICALS
Detection of CO2 from leaf discs placed in dark and light, with the help of indicator.
To study the slide of L.S. of a dicot stem, identifying and drawing vessel element, sieve tube and companion cells.
To observe the annual rings in the log of a tree and calculation of the age of a plant by counting number of annual rings.
To demonstrate phototropism, geotropism and thigmotropism in plants.
To demonstrate leaf folding of leaf after touch in Mimosa pudica.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Select the correct answer.
Which is found essential for organic compounds? (A) calcium (B) nitrogen (C) carbon (D) phosphorus
Necrosis may occur due to the deficiency of (A) nitrogen (B) magnesium (C) phosphorus (D) calcium
Insectivorous plants use insects as a source of (A) phosphorus (B) glucose (C) oxygen (D) nitrogen
Uptake of water and minerals from soil take place through (A) root cap (B) root (C) xylem (D) root hair
Apoplast pathway involves movement of water through (A) cell walls (B) cytoplasm of cells (C) intercellular spaces (D) all of these
In plants, food is transported in the form of (A) glucose (B) fructose (C) maltose (D) sucrose

CHEMICAL BONDING
THEORIES OF COVALENT BONDING AND SHAPES OF MOLECULES
This is a 12 days lesson.
After completing this lesson, the students will be able to: Distinguish between sigma and pi bonds. Describe the change in bond lengths of hetero-nuclear molecules due to difference in electronegativity. Differentiate among molecular, network and metallic solids. Explain what is meant by the term ionic character of a covalent bond. Use VSEPR and VBT theories to describe the shapes of simple covalent molecules. Predict shapes of some molecules using orbital hybridization. Predict molecular polarity from the shapes of molecules. Predict the shapes of some molecules from the number of bonded pairs and lone pairs of electrons around the central atom. Explain bond energies and explain how they can be used to compare bond strengths of different chemical bonds. Explain how knowledge of molecular polarity can be used to explain some physical and chemical properties of molecules.

INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we will discuss the shapes of molecules on the theoretical basis and some factors affecting their shapes and behaviours. We start by describing the VSEPR (Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion) model, which allows us to connect two dimensional Lewis structures into three dimensional shapes. You will see how molecular shape and bond polarity combine to create a polarity for these molecules and how molecular shape influences biological function. Then we consider bonding theories based on quantum mechanics. Valence bond theory explains how the molecular shape arises from the interactions of atomic orbitals. Molecular orbital theory explains the existence of orbitals that extend over the whole molecule.

The Lewis concept of formation of covalent bond as a shared pair of electrons between two atoms does not explain shapes of molecules. Similarly, many other properties such as bond energy, relative strengths of bonds, and paramagnetism cannot be explained on the basis of this concept. However, modern theories of chemical bonding not only explain all of our experimental observations, but also allow us to predict the shapes and many other properties of molecules. These theories can also be used to predict many physical and chemical properties of molecules.

SHAPES OF MOLECULES
The shapes of molecules can be predicted by Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory (VSEPR). This theory was suggested by Sidgwick and Powell (1940). According to this theory; the shape of a molecule or ion depends on the number of shared pairs as well as the unshared electrons around the central atom of the molecule or ion. Gillespie and Nyholm in 1957 proposed that the arrangement of atoms in a molecule is determined by the repulsive interactions among all electron pairs in the valence shell of central atom. Basic postulates of VSEPR theory are as follows:
The electron pairs present around the central polyvalent atom are arranged in space as far apart as possible so that, there is minimum repulsion between them.
A non-bonding pair or lone pair of electron occupies more space on the surface of an atom than a bonding pair.
Both the lone pairs as well as bond pairs determine the geometry of the molecules.
The magnitude of repulsion between the electron pairs in a given molecule decreases in the following order: Lone pair - Lone pair > Lone pair - Bond pair > Bond pair - Bond pair
Lone pair causes deviation from ideal bond angles, which in turn change regular geometry.
The two electron pairs of a double and three electron pairs of a triple bond contain a higher electron charge density. Therefore, they occupy more space than one electron pair of a single bond. However they behave like a single electron pair in determining the geometry of the molecules.

Applications of VSEPR Theory
The molecules and ions are classified according to the number of electron pairs present around central atom, irrespective of the fact whether they are of bonding or nonbonding type. In order to describe this theory, consider hypothetical molecules having central atom "A" with more than one terminal atoms bonded with it. Lone pair if present in the molecules is represented by "E".

Shapes of molecules containing two electron pairs around a central atom: AB2 Type. A molecule having two bond pairs of electrons but no lone pair around a central atom always has a linear geometry, because such an arrangement of atoms keeps the two bonding pairs as far as possible. The bond angle will be 180°.

Shapes of molecules containing three electron pairs around a central atom: AB3 type with no lone pair. A molecule having three bond pairs of electrons but no lone pairs around a central atom always has trigonal planar geometry, because such an arrangement of atoms keeps the three pairs of electrons as far apart as possible. The bond angle will be 120°. Boron trifluoride is an example of molecules, which have three bond pairs of electrons. BF3 has trigonal planar geometry and each F-B-F bond angle will be 120°. Other examples of such molecules are BCl3, AlCl3, GaBr3, InI3, etc.

AB2E type with one lone pair and two bond pairs. In case of PbCl2 and SnCl2 molecules, there are three electron pairs around the central atoms, one lone pair and two bond pairs. According to VSEPR concept the lone pair (non-bonding) of electron occupies more space and exerts a greater repulsion on the bond pairs resulting in the shortening of Cl-Pb-Cl angle. Thus, the shape of PbCl2 molecule is distorted and becomes angular or V-shape with Cl-Pb-Cl bond angle less than 120°.

AB2 type with multiple bonds. Examples: SO2. In SO2, all the three regions are occupied by S-O bonds. There is no lone pair hence the structure will be perfectly triangular having 120°.

Shapes of molecules containing four electron pairs around a central atom: AB4, AB3E, AB2E2.
AB4 type with no lone pair: A molecule having four bond pairs of electrons but no lone pairs around a central atom always has regular tetrahedral geometry, because such an arrangement of atoms keeps the four pairs of electrons as far as possible. The bond angle will be 109.5°. The atoms are at four corners of a regular tetrahedron. Examples: CH4 (Methane), CCl4, SiF4, SnCl4 etc. Methane is a typical example of this type.

AB3E type with one lone pair and three bond pairs: A molecule having three bond pairs and a lone pair around the central atom has triangular pyramidal geometry instead of tetrahedral. Due to repulsions between lone pair and bond pairs, the bond angles are reduced to 107.5° instead of 109.5°. NH3 is a typical example. Other examples: PH3, AsH3, SbH3, etc.

AB2E2 type with two lone pairs and two bond pairs: The presence of two lone pairs, introduces three types of repulsions: lone pair-lone pair, lone pair-bond pair and bond pair-bond pair. In H2O, out of the four corners of a tetrahedron two are occupied by two lone pairs and remaining two by bond pairs. The lone pairs repel each other and their repulsion among themselves and with the bond pairs cause the bond angle to be reduced to 104.5° and geometry becomes V shaped.

Table: Bonding and the shape of Molecules
Number of electron pairs around central atom Number of bond pairs Number of lone pairs Shape Examples
2 2 0 Linear BeCl2, HgCl2, CO2
3 3 0 Trigonal planar BF3, BCl3, CH2O
3 2 1 Bent SO2, O3
4 4 0 Tetrahedral CH4, CBr4, SiCl4
4 3 1 Pyramidal NH3, PCl3
4 2 2 Bent H2O, H2S, SCl2
5 5 0 Trigonal bipyramid PCl5
6 6 0 Octahedral SF6

Shapes of molecules containing five electron pairs around a central atom: AB5 type. With more than four electron pairs, it becomes increasingly difficult to visualize geometries of molecules. Thus a central atom containing five electron pairs around it has trigonal bipyramidal geometry. A trigonal bipyramidal arrangement of atoms is the structure in which five electron pairs can have minimum repulsion. In PCl5, there are five electron pairs in the valence shell of central P atom. All of them are bonding pairs and thus PCl5 adopts trigonal bipyramidal structure.

Shapes of molecules containing six electron pairs (AB6 type): Molecules in which the central atom has six electron pairs, adopt octahedral geometry. The examples of such molecules are SF6, PoCl6 etc.

Steps to predict the shape of molecules:
The following steps are generally required to predict geometry or shape by VSEPR method.
Draw dot diagram for the molecule.
Determine the number of valence electrons surrounding the central atom.
Determine the number of bond pairs and lone pairs of electrons.
Determine the geometrical distribution of electron pairs so that they are as far apart as possible.

Example: Predict the shape of H2S.
Valence electrons of S-atom = 6
Electrons contributed by H atoms = 2
Total no. of electrons around S-atom = 8
Electron pairs = 4
Bond pairs = 2
Lone pairs = 2
Thus H2S is AB2E2 type molecule. It will possess V-shaped geometry.

THEORIES OF COVALENT BONDING
Basically, there are two theories which are used to understand the nature of covalent bond. These are: Valence bond theory (VBT) and Molecular Orbital theory (MOT).

Valence Bond Theory (VBT)
It is a quantum mechanical treatment of molecules and was presented by Heitler and London (1927) and further developed by Pauling and Slater. The main points of this theory are:
A covalent bond is formed by the overlap of half filled atomic orbitals of two atoms.
During overlapping, atomic orbitals retain their identity.
The overlapping orbitals must have electrons of opposite spin.
The number of covalent bonds formed by an atom is equal to the number of unpaired electrons in the valence shell of the atom.
When two orbitals overlap, a single bond is formed. If additional orbitals of atoms overlap, then multiple bonds are formed.
In order to form a bond, the overlapping orbitals must have the same symmetry with respect to the bond axis. A line joining the nuclei of two bonded atoms is called bond axis.
During overlapping of orbitals energy is released. The greater the overlap between the orbitals, the greater is the energy released and the stronger is the bond formed.

Types of Overlapping and Nature of Covalent Bonds
There are two main types of covalent bonds which are obtained by overlapping. These are: Sigma bond (σ) and Pi Bond (π).

Sigma bond (σ): Any first bond formed between two partially filled atomic orbitals by head on overlap is called sigma bond. In a sigma bond, the region of highest electron density is symmetrically distributed along the bond axis. The electron density is maximum in the region between the two nuclei. The first bond formed between any two atoms is the sigma bond. All single covalent bonds are sigma bonds, and the electrons occupying a sigma bond are called σ electrons. A sigma bond is formed by the overlapping of the following types as shown: s-s, s-p, p-p.

Pi bond (π): A pi bond is formed between two already σ bonded atoms by the sidewise overlap of their two half filled atomic orbitals whose axes are parallel. In pi bond formation, the two overlapping atomic orbitals do not lie on the bond axis. The overlap of p-orbitals in pi bond formation is not as good as that in a sigma bond. One or two pi bonds can form between two atoms. A pi bond is formed by side wise or lateral overlap between two p-orbitals which have their axes parallel to the molecular axis. The side wise overlap is not too efficient, so that is why sigma bond is always stronger than a pi bond. In pi bond formation which is over a covalent bond, the electron density is greatest above and below the line joining the two nuclei and this is also called nodal plane. In figure, parallel, co-planar, half filled p-orbitals on adjacent atoms can form a π bond. Only one bond in any multiple bonds can be a sigma bond, the remaining bonds are pi bonds. On the basis of hybridization, the overlapping of any hybrid-orbitals always produces a sigma (σ) bond.

Examples of Valence Bond Formation
Formation of H2 molecule: Each H atom has the electron configuration 1s1. As two hydrogen atoms approach each other, their half filled 1s orbitals overlap, giving a H-H bond. The overlap of orbitals provides a means for sharing electrons, thereby helping each H to complete its valence shell. The electron density is concentrated in the region along the line joining the two nuclei. The bond thus formed is a sigma (σ) bond.

Formation of Cl2 molecule: Electronic configuration of chlorine is: 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3px2 3py2 3pz1. In Cl2 molecule, the half-filled 3pz orbital of one chlorine atom overlaps with the half-filled 3pz orbital of another chlorine atom along the inter-nuclear axis to form a sigma bond.

Formation of HF molecule: Electronic configurations of F and H atoms are: F: 1s2 2s2 2px2 2py2 2pz1; H: 1s1. In the formation of HF molecule, the half-filled 1s orbital of H atom overlaps with the half-filled 2pz orbital of F to form σ bond.

Formation of O2 molecule: In oxygen molecule, O2 is obtained by the combination of two oxygen atoms. Electronic configuration of an oxygen atom: 1s2 2s2 2px2 2py1 2pz1. Each oxygen atom has two unpaired electrons in two half-filled 2p orbitals in the valence shell. On the basis of VBT, two covalent bonds should be formed between two O atoms. One bond is formed by the head on overlapping of 2pz and 2pz orbitals on each oxygen atom. This gives a σ bond. The other bond is formed by the side-to-side overlap of half-filled 2py orbitals on each oxygen atom. This gives a π bond. Thus a double bond is formed between two oxygen atoms. One is σ bond and the other is π bond.

Formation of N2 molecule: In nitrogen molecule, N2 is formed by the combination of two N atoms. The electronic configuration of N atom is: 1s2 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz1. Each N atom has three half-filled p orbitals. On the basis of VBT, three covalent bonds should be formed between two nitrogen atoms. When the two nitrogen atoms approach each other, the two 2pz orbitals undergo end-to-end overlap, giving a σ bond. The end-to-end overlap brings the two nitrogen atoms so close together that their parallel 2p orbitals can undergo side-to-side overlap to produce two pi bonds. Note that each π bond is in two parts surrounding a σ bond. There are five distinct regions of electron charge in nitrogen molecule: two electrons between the nuclei forming a σ bond, two electrons above and below the σ electrons forming a π bond, two electrons in front of and behind the σ electrons forming another π bond. Thus a triple bond is formed between two nitrogen atoms; one is σ bond while the other two are π bonds.

Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
The valency of an element generally corresponds to the number of unpaired electrons in the valence shell of an atom of that element. However this is not always true. For example, the valency of beryllium (Be) is two and carbon (C) has a valency of four, while both have no unpaired electrons in ground state. Boron (B) has a valency of three and carbon has a valency of four, while both have only one and two unpaired electrons respectively. Pauling resolved this discrepancy by introducing the concept of orbital hybridization. Hybridization involves mixing of the pure s and p (one or more) orbitals of an atom to give new equivalent orbitals, before the bonding process takes place. The number of hybridized orbitals is equal to the number of atomic orbitals overlapped. A bonding process can then be visualized as a process of overlapping the hybrid atomic orbital of one atom with a pure atomic orbital of another. We know simple valence Bond theory does not explain the covalent bond formation in many elements. So modification in this theory was made in the form of “hybridization concept”. The process of mixing atomic orbitals of different energy and shape to form a set of new orbitals of the same energy and same shape is called hybridization and the orbitals so obtained are called “hybrid orbitals”. According to this concept atomic orbitals differing slightly in energy intermix to form new orbitals of equal energies and shape called hybrid orbitals which differ from the parent atomic orbitals in shape and energy and possess specific geometry. It also gives a satisfactory explanation for the valency of the elements. In this process, the electron belonging to ground state structure are promoted to the excited state as a result of which there is an increase in the number of unpaired electrons. The energy required for the excitation is compensated by the energy released during the process of bond formation with other atoms. Depending upon the nature of orbitals involved there are many types of hybridization. For example, sp3, sp2, sp hybridization.

sp3 Hybridization: The process of mixing one s orbital and three p orbitals to form four new equivalent sp3 hybrid orbitals is called sp3 hybridization. Let us discuss the structure of methane, ammonia and water by understanding the sp3 hybridization of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms.

Structure of Methane: C (ground state) = 1s2, 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz0; C (excited state) =1s2, 2s1 2px1 2py1 2pz1; C (hybridized state) =1s2, (sp3)1 (sp3)1 (sp3)1 (sp3)1. In methane molecule, carbon is attached to four hydrogen atoms by the formation of four sp3-s sigma bonds. Carbon atom is at the centre of tetrahedral geometry with hydrogen atoms at the four corners. Remember that the angle between them is 109.5°. Each bond is formed by the overlap of sp3 hybrid orbitals of carbon with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms separately to form four sigma bonds. The molecule possesses a tetrahedral geometry. The C-H bonds which result are directed towards the corners of a regular tetrahedron. Each H-C-H bond angle is 109.5°. The tetrahedral structure of CH4 molecule has four faces and four corners.

Structure of Ammonia, NH3: In NH3 molecule, the central atom is nitrogen. It contains five electrons in its valence shell. N (ground state)=1s2 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz1. N (hybridized state) = 1s2 sp3 sp3 sp3 sp3. One s and three p orbitals of nitrogen atom hybridize to form four sp3 hybrid orbitals. They are directed towards the four corners of a tetrahedron. One of the hybrid orbitals is completely filled with one pair of electrons and the remaining three orbitals are half filled. The half filled sp3 hybridized orbitals of nitrogen overlap with three 1s-orbitals of three hydrogen atoms. The three hydrogen atoms are located at three corners, whereas the lone pair of electrons at the fourth corner of the tetrahedron. This results in a pyramidal molecule. The three hydrogen atoms form the base and the lone pair of electrons the apex. The experimentally determined value of H-N-H bond angle in NH3 molecule is 107.5°, which is less than the normal tetrahedral value of 109.5°. The deviation from the tetrahedral angle is explained on the basis of repulsion between lone pair and bond pairs. The lone pair-bond pair repulsion is greater than bond pair-bond pair repulsion. As a result, the bond pairs move away from the lone pair and are pushed closer together. Hence, the angle between bond pairs is reduced.

Structure of Water, H2O: In H2O molecule, the central atom is oxygen. It contains six electrons in its valence shell. O (ground state)=1s2 2s2 2px2 2py1 2pz1. O (hybridized state) = 1s2 (sp3)2 (sp3)1 (sp3)1. One s and three p orbitals of oxygen atom intermix to give four sp3 hybrid orbitals which are directed towards the four corners of a regular tetrahedron. Two of these orbitals are completely filled and remaining two sp3 hybrid orbitals are partially filled. Thus the two partially filled sp3 hybrid orbitals overlap with two 1s orbitals of two hydrogen atoms to form two sigma bonds. Each bond is formed by sp3-s overlap. The two hydrogen atoms are located at two corners of tetrahedron, whereas the two lone pairs at the remaining two corners of the tetrahedron. The result is a V-shaped molecule. The experimentally determined value of H-O-H bond angle in H2O molecule is 104.5°, which is lesser than the normal tetrahedral value. The deviation from the tetrahedral angle is explained on the basis of repulsion between lone pairs and bond pairs. The repulsion of lone pair-lone pair > lone pair-bond pair > bond pair-bond pair. As a result, the bond pairs move away from the lone pairs and come closer to each other. Hence the angle between bond pairs decreases up to 104.5°.

sp2 Hybridization: The mixing of one s and two p orbitals of the same atom to form three identical orbitals is called sp2-hybridization. The three sp2 hybrid orbitals are directed towards the three corners of an equilateral triangle. The bond angle between any two hybrid orbitals is 120°. Each sp2 hybrid orbital has 33.3% s-character and 66.6% p-character. The sp2 hybrid orbitals can form only sigma bonds by overlapping with other atomic orbitals.

Structure of Boron trifluoride, BF3: In BF3 molecule, the central atom is boron. It contains three electrons in its valence shell. The electronic configuration of valence shell of B-atom in the ground and excited states: B: 1s2 2s2 2px1 (ground state); 1s2 2s1 2px1 2py1 (excited state). One s and two 2p orbitals of boron atom intermix to give three sp2 hybridized orbitals. The three sp2 hybrid orbitals lie in the same plane and are directed towards the corners of an equilateral triangle with boron atom at the centre. The bond angle between any two sp2 orbitals is 120°. The three sp2 orbitals contain one electron each and are thus partially filled. The partially filled 2pz orbitals of three fluorine atoms overlap with each sp2 hybrid orbitals of boron atom to form three sp2-pz sigma bonds. As a result, BF3 molecule has triangular planar structure.

Structure of Ethene, CH2 = CH2: The electronic configuration of carbon atom is: C (ground state) =1s2, 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz0; C (Excited state ) = 1s2, 2s1 2px1 2py1 2pz1; C (hybrid state) = 1s2, (sp2)1 (sp2)1 (sp2)1 2pz1. In CH2 = CH2 molecule, one s and two p orbitals of each C-atom intermix to form three sp2 hybrid orbitals. The sp2 hybrid orbitals are triangular planar oriented at the angle of 120° to each other. Each carbon atom is left with one unhybridized p-orbital perpendicular to the plane of sp2 hybrid orbitals. One sp2 hybrid orbital of each C-atom overlaps linearly to form the C-C σ bond. Remaining two sp2 orbitals of each C-atom overlap with 1s atomic orbital of hydrogen atom to form two C-H single bonds. A π bond is formed by the sidewise overlap of two half-filled pz atomic orbitals in such a way that the probability of finding electrons is maximum above and below the line joining the nuclei.

sp Hybridization: The mixing of one s and one p orbital of the same atom to form two identical orbitals is called sp-hybridization. The two sp-hybrid orbitals are directed at an angle of 180° to each other. Each sp hybrid orbital has 50% s-character and 50% p-character. The sp-hybrid orbitals can form only sigma bonds by overlapping with other atomic orbitals. Examples: BeCl2, C2H2.

Structure of BeCl2 (Beryllium chloride): In BeCl2 molecule, the central atom is beryllium atom. Beryllium atom contains two electrons in its valence shell. The electronic configuration of valence shell of beryllium atom in ground state and excited state: Be: 1s2, 2s2, 2px0, 2py0, 2pz0 (ground state); 1s2, 2s1 2px1, 2py0, 2pz0 (excited state). One 2s and one 2p orbitals of beryllium atom intermix to form two sp hybrid orbitals. Each sp hybrid orbital contains one electron. The two sp hybrid orbital lie in a straight line with beryllium at the centre. One sp hybrid orbital overlaps linearly with p-orbital of one chlorine atom to form a sigma bond. Similarly, another sp hybrid orbital overlaps with p-orbital of second chlorine atom to form another sigma bond. Thus BeCl2 molecule has a linear shape.

Structure of Ethyne, CH≡CH: Electronic configuration of carbon atom in the ground and excited states: C (ground state) =1s2, 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz0; C (hybrid state) = 1s2, (sp)1 (sp)1 2py1 2pz1. One 2s and one 2p orbitals of carbon atom intermix to give two sp hybrid orbitals. The 2py and 2pz orbitals remain unhybridized. Each sp hybrid orbital contains one electron. The two sp hybrid orbitals are directed along a straight line at an angle of 180° between them. The two unhybridized p orbitals are perpendicular to each other and also perpendicular to the plane of the two sp hybrid orbitals. Thus each carbon atom possesses two sp hybrid orbitals and two pure p atomic orbitals. Each C-atom undergoes sp-s overlap with 1s orbital of H-atoms and sp-sp overlap with other carbon atom to form two σ-bonds. The two half-filled p orbitals of two carbon atoms overlap sideways to form two π-bonds. Thus ethyne molecule contains one σ-bond and two π-bonds between two carbon atoms and two carbon-hydrogen σ-bonds. The electronic clouds of two π-bonds merge into each other to form cylindrical shaped π-electron cloud. The molecule is linear in shape.

Drawbacks of Valence Bond Theory
It fails to explain: (a) The formation of coordinate covalent bond. (b) The formation of odd electron molecules or ions. (c) The paramagnetic behaviour of oxygen molecule.

Molecular Orbital Theory
The method of molecular orbital theory was developed in 1927-1928 by Hund and Mulliken and in 1929 by Lennard-Jones. It is assumed that linear combination of atomic orbitals form new orbitals called molecular orbitals which are characteristics of the whole molecule. The molecular orbitals extend over more nuclei of the bonded atoms. Two atomic orbitals after combining give two molecular orbitals which differ in energy. One of them, having lower energy is called bonding molecular orbital (BMO) while the other having high energy is called anti-bonding molecular orbital (ABMO). The bonding molecular orbital is formed by the linear combination (addition) of atomic orbitals while the anti-bonding molecular orbital is formed by the subtractive combination of atomic orbitals. Electrons occupy molecular orbitals according to Aufbau principle and Hund's rule. The electrons from each atom fill the bonding molecular orbital or π orbital while the anti-bonding σ orbital or π orbital may have zero, one or two electrons. The following diagram illustrates the formation of the molecular orbitals (lower energy and higher energy) and also the order of filling of electrons according to rules mentioned above. In this type of diagram, the combining atomic orbitals are shown on two extremes and the resulting molecular orbitals (MO) are represented in the middle column. Atomic orbitals of same energy are shown at the same level. The difference between the energies of atomic orbitals and the bonding MO’s depend upon the extent of overlap of atomic orbitals. A large overlap results in greater lowering of the energy of bonding MO (and a corresponding large rise in energy in the anti-bonding MO). Larger the overlap, stronger will be the resulting bond. According to the above diagram, the sequence of energy levels in which electrons are filled up is: σ1s < σ*1s < σ2s < σ*2s < σ2pz < π2py = π2pz < π*2py = π*2pz < σ*2pz.

There are two types of overlapping in molecular orbital theory: Head on approach (linear overlapping) or linear combination and Sideways approach (parallel overlapping). Head on approach can take place between s-s, s-p and p-p atomic orbitals. When two s atomic orbitals overlap, they form two molecular orbitals. Molecular orbital which has low energy than an atomic orbital is called σ orbital. Molecular orbital which has high energy than an atomic orbital is called σ* orbital as shown in the figure. Sideways approach or parallel overlapping: When axes of two p orbitals (i.e py or pz orbitals) are parallel to each other, they overlap sidewise. This results in formation of two molecular orbitals. The bonding molecular orbital π(2py) or π(2pz) has zero electron density on the nuclei. The electron density is uniformly distributed above and below the molecular axis. On the other hand, π*(2py) or π*(2pz) anti-bonding molecular orbital has node region. Since the 2py and 2pz atomic orbitals are of equal energy, the molecular orbitals arising from them are also of equal energy i.e., degenerate orbitals.

Bond Order
Bond order between two atoms after the atomic orbitals overlap is taken as half of the difference between the number of bonding and anti-bonding electrons. Bond order = (No. of electrons in BMOs - No. of electrons in ABMOs)/2. For example, bond order formed in hydrogen molecule may be calculated as follows. Number of electrons in the bonding orbitals =2. Number of electrons in the anti-bonding orbitals =0. Bond order = (2-0)/2 =1. It is a common practice that only MOs formed from valence orbital are considered in bond order calculations. It should be noted that a bond between two atoms can be formed only when the number of electrons in the bonding orbital must be greater than the number of electrons in the anti-bonding molecular orbitals.

Relative Energies of the Molecular Orbitals
The relative energies of the molecular orbitals formed from 2s and 2p atomic orbitals are generally obtained by spectroscopic measurements. The molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules such as O2, F2 and their positive and negative ions can be shown in the following increasing order of energy: σ1s < σ*1s < σ2s < σ*2s < σ2px < π2py = π2pz < π*2py = π*2pz < σ*2px. Diatomic molecule such as H2, He2, B2, C2, and N2 (lighter molecules) show slightly different energy order: σ1s < σ*1s < σ2s < σ*2s < π2py = π2pz < σ2px < π*2py = π*2pz < σ*2px. As seen in the energy order of lighter molecules like B2, C2, N2, σ2px is higher in energy than π2py = π2pz group orbitals. This reversal is due to mixing of 2s and 2px atomic orbitals. When the energy difference of 2s and 2p atomic orbitals is small; there is a possibility of mixing of s and p orbitals (hybridization of A.O.). As a result σ2s and σ*2s MO do not retain pure s-character and σ2px and σ*2px MOs do not have pure p-character. All the four MOs acquire mixed s and p character. Consequently, their energies change in such a way that MOs σ2s and σ*2s are lowered in energy while MOs σ2px and σ*2px become less stable. The energies of π2py = π2pz and π*2py = π*2pz remains unchanged. σ2px is raised to such a level that it becomes higher than π2py and π2pz. In O2 and F2 there is 2600 kJ/mol energy difference of their 2s and 2p orbitals which is too high to allow mixing, so their energy order is normal.

Energy level diagrams, Electronic structures and Bonding properties of some Homonuclear diatomic molecules.
Hydrogen molecule H2: The hydrogen molecule is formed from the overlap of 1s atomic orbitals of two hydrogen atoms. The two electrons occupy the lower energy σ1s orbital as shown in the diagram. The electronic configuration of the molecule is represented by the equation: 2H (1s1) → H2 [(σ1s)2]. Bond order = (2-0)/2 =1. Thus the two hydrogen atoms are bonded through a single bond in the molecule. We conclude that the H2 molecule is stable. It has bond dissociation energy of 436 kJ/mol and is diamagnetic in nature i.e., atoms, ions or molecules in which electrons are all paired in their molecular electronic configuration are diamagnetic. They are repelled by both poles of magnet.

Helium Molecule He2: He: 1s2. The energy level diagram for He2 is similar to that of H2 except that it has two more electrons which occupy the anti-bonding σ*1s orbital shown in the diagram. 2He (1s2) → He2 [(σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2]. Bond order = (2-2)/2 =0. Thus its bond order is zero and we conclude that the molecule is not stable. In fact, He2 is not known, helium exists as mono-atomic molecules.

Lithium Molecule Li2: Li: 1s2 2s1. The electronic configuration for Li2 has a total of six electrons. Two in σ1s, two in σ*1s and two in σ2s molecular orbitals. In spectroscopic notation this can be represented as Li2 [KK (σ2s)2]. There are two more electrons in the anti-bonding orbitals and the bond order is one. We conclude that the molecule is stable. Indeed it is known to exist in the vapour phase and is diamagnetic.

Beryllium Molecule Be2: Be: 1s2 2s2. The energy level diagram for Be2 is similar to that of Li2 except that it has two more electrons which occupy the anti-bonding σ*2s orbital. Bond order = (2-2)/2 =0. The electronic configuration is Be2 [KK (σ2s)2 (σ*2s)2]. Be2 is very unstable.

Boron Molecule B2: B: 1s2 2s2 2p1. Boron atom has the configuration of 1s2, 2s2, 2p1. Boron is the first element with five electrons to be considered for bonding. Spectroscopic study has suggested that for B2, C2 and N2 molecules π2p orbitals are lower in energy than σ2p orbital. Thus the electronic configuration of B2 is: 2B (1s2 2s2 2p1) → B2[KK(σ2s)2(σ*2s)2 (π2py)1 (π2pz)1]. Bond order = (4-2)/2=1. Thus the two B-atoms are bonded through only one bond in the molecule. The experiments verify not only that the molecule exists in vapour phase but that it is paramagnetic (atoms, ions or molecules) with two unpaired electrons. The bond energy is 270 kJ/mol. Paramagnetic species which have one or more unpaired electrons in their molecular electronic configuration are paramagnetic. They are attracted to magnetic field.

Nitrogen Molecule N2: N: 1s2 2s2 2px1 2py1 2pz1. In the electronic configuration, only 2s and three 2p orbitals from each N atom are to be considered in the bond formation. The electronic configuration of N2 molecule is: N2 [KK (σ2s)2(σ*2s)2(π2py)2(π2pz)2(σ2px)2]. Bond order= (8-2)/2 =3. Thus the two N-atoms are bonded through a triple bond. N2 is a very stable molecule and has a very high bond energy i.e., 945 kJ/mol and is diamagnetic in nature. This is consistent with MOT. It is diamagnetic due to no unpaired electron. It has a very short bond length.

Oxygen Molecule O2: O: 1s2 2s2 2px2 2py1 2pz1. Lewis theory predicts that O2 would be diamagnetic. However experimental evidence indicates oxygen as being paramagnetic having two unpaired electrons. A structure consistent with this fact is given by MOT. Spectroscopic evidence indicates that for O2, the σ2p orbital lies lower in energy than π2p orbitals. The electronic configuration of O2 molecule is: O2 [KK (σ2s)2(σ*2s)2(σ2px)2(π2py)2(π2pz)2(π*2py)1(π*2pz)1]. Bond order= (8-4)/2 =2. It suggests that the two oxygen atoms are bonded through a double bond. The two unpaired electrons in the degenerate anti-bonding orbitals make O2 paramagnetic, hence it is paramagnetic in nature. So we conclude that the molecule should be very stable as it has high bond energy i.e. 498 kJ/mol with bond length 1.21 Å.

Fluorine Molecule F2: F: 1s2 2s2 2p5. Each fluorine atom has the 1s2 2s2 2p5 configuration. The corresponding electronic configuration of F2 molecule is: F2 [KK(σ2s)2(σ*2s)2(σ2px)2(π2py)2(π2pz)2(π*2py)2(π*2pz)2]. Bond order = (8-6)/2 =1. It predicts that two F-atoms are bonded through a single bond. The F-F bond distance is longer (1.43 Å) than that for O2 (1.21 Å) and N2 (1.09 Å). The bond energy of F2 molecule is quite low and it is diamagnetic in nature.

Comparison of Valence Bond and Molecular Orbital Theories
The similarities of the two theories are: Both explain the formation of covalent bond. According to both theories, a covalent bond is formed by the overlapping of atomic orbitals along the molecular axis. In both theories, the electron charge resides in the region between the two nuclei. The differences of the two theories are: According to valence bond theory, only half-filled atomic orbitals of interacting atoms are involved in bond formation. In valence bond theory, the concerned atomic orbitals retain their individual identity. It fails to explain the paramagnetic behaviour of molecules like O2 molecule i.e., electrical properties. It does not give idea about the bond order. According to molecular orbital theory, all the atomic orbitals of interacting atoms are involved in bond formation. In MOT, the two atomic orbitals lose their individual identity. It explains the paramagnetic behaviour of molecules like O2 molecule i.e., electrical properties. It gives idea about bond order by which we can determine that whether the bond is single, double or triple. It explains the non-existence of He2 molecule.

BOND ENERGY (BOND ENTHALPY)
When a bond is formed between two atoms, energy is released (exothermic process), the same amount of energy is absorbed (endothermic process) when the bond is broken to form neutral atoms. So the bond energy is the amount of energy required to break all bonds of a particular type in one mole of the substance. The strength of a bond is measured by its bond energy. The higher the bond energy, the stronger is the bond. It is determined experimentally by measuring the heat involved in a chemical reaction. It is also called bond enthalpy, as it is measure of enthalpy change at 298K. The enthalpy change in splitting a substance into its component atoms is called enthalpy of atomization.

It is expressed in kilojoules per mole (kJmol–1). It is the energy required to break up an Avogadro’s number (6.02x1023) of bonds i.e., one mole of bond. It is found that energies of multiple bonds are greater than those of single bonds. But a double bond is not twice as strong as a single bond and a triple bond is not thrice as strong as a single bond. It means that a σ bond is stronger than a π bond. Also, a polar covalent bond is stronger than a non-polar covalent bond. Bond energy of H-H in H2 molecule at 25°C (298K) is 436 kJ/mole. The bond energy of Cl-Cl bond in Cl2 molecule at 25°C is 242 kJ/mole. Bond energy of H-Cl bond in HCl molecule at 25°C is 431 kJ/mole.

Bond energy is a measure of bond strength. Higher the bond energy, the stronger is the bond. It depends upon the following factors: The greater the difference of electronegativity between the bonded atoms, the greater is the bond energy and stronger is the bond. For example, in H-F, the electronegativity difference is 1.9 and bond energy is 567 kJ/mol. In H-Cl, the electronegativity difference is 0.9 and bond energy is 431 kJ/mol. In H-Br, the electronegativity difference is 0.7 and bond energy is 366 kJ/mol. In H-I, the electronegativity difference is 0.4 and bond energy is 299 kJ/mol. From the above data it is observed that HF molecule has higher bond energy (567 kJmol-1) due to greater electronegativity difference i.e., 1.9. The smaller the size of the bonded atoms, the greater is the bond energy and stronger is the bond. The bond energy of H-H bond is 436 kJmol-1 and that Cl-Cl is 242 kJmol-1. This is due to the shorter bond length in H2 molecule and greater bond length in Cl2 molecule (larger size of Cl atom than H atom). Multiple bonds also affect the bond energy, greater the no. of bonds greater will be the bond energy.

Table: Average Bond energies (kJmol-1) of single bonds.
Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy
C-H 413 N-H 391 H-H 436
C-C 347 N-N 163 H-F 567
C-N 293 N-O 201 H-Cl 431
C-O 358 N-F 272 H-Br 366
C-F 485 N-Cl 200 H-I 299
C-Cl 328 N-Br 243 O-H 463
C-Br 276 S-H 347 O-O 146
C-I 240 S-S 266 O-F 190
C-S 259 S-O 265 O-Cl 203
N-N 163 S-F 327 O-Br 172
Cl-F 253 Cl-Cl 242 Cl-Br 216 Br-Br 193 Br-I 175 I-I 151

Table: Average Bond energies of multiple bonds (kJmol-1)
Bond Bond Energy (kJmol-1) Bond Bond Energy (kJmol-1)
C=C 611 C≡C 837
C=N 615 C≡N 891
C=O 799 C≡O 1072
N=N 418 N≡N 945
O=O 498

Relationship between the Bond Energy and Polarity or Strength of a Bond and its Ionic Character
Polar covalent bonds are stronger than non-polar bonds and greater amount of energy is required to break them. For example, bond energy of H-Cl bond and theoretically calculated bond energy of H-Cl bond.

Theoretical calculation of bond energy of HCl: Step 1: Calculation of bond energy contribution of one H atom. Bond energy of 1 mole of H-H bonds = 436 kJ. Bond energy of 6.02x1023 H-H bonds = 436 kJ. Bond energy of one H-H bond = 436 / 6.02x1023 = 72.42x10-23 kJ. Bond energy contribution of one H atom = 72.42x10-23 / 2 = 36.21x10-23 kJ. Step 2: Calculation of bond energy contribution of one Cl atom. Bond energy of 1 mole of Cl-Cl bonds = 242 kJ. Bond energy of 6.02x1023 Cl-Cl bonds = 242 kJ. Bond energy of one Cl-Cl bond = 242 / 6.02x1023 = 40.19x10-23 kJ. Bond energy contribution of one Cl atom = 40.19x10-23 / 2 = 20.09 x 10-23 kJ. Step 3: Calculation of bond energy of 1 mole of H-Cl bonds. This calculation is based on the assumption that H-Cl bond is non polar. Bond energy of one H-Cl bond = Bond energy of H-atom + Bond energy of Cl atom = (36.21x10-23 + 20.09x10-23) kJ = 56.3x10-23 kJ. Bond energy of 6.02x1023 H-Cl bonds = 56.3x10-23 x 6.02x1023 = 338.93 kJ. Thus theoretical bond energy of one mole of H-Cl bonds = 338.93 kJ/mole. The relation between bond energy and electronegativity can be seen from theoretically calculated and experimentally determined values of HCl bond. Theoretically calculated bond energy of H-Cl bond = 338.93 kJmol-1. Experimentally determined bond energy of H-Cl bond = 431 kJmol-1. The experimentally determined bond energy is significantly greater than the calculated value which means a more stable H-Cl bond. This stability is due to the ionic character present in the bond. The amount of additional bond energy depends on the electronegativity of the bonded atoms. Greater the difference of electronegativity between the two bonded atoms, the greater is the ionic character and stronger is the bond.

Comparison of experimental and theoretical bond energies
Bond Energies kJmol-1.
Bond Theoretical Experimental
H-F 338.9 567
H-Cl 338.9 431
H-Br 338.9 366
H-I 338.9 299

BOND LENGTH
It may be defined as the distance between the nuclei of atoms joined by a covalent bond. This distance between the bonded atoms is not constant, because the bonded atoms are always vibrating with respect to each other. Therefore, average of minimum and maximum distance is considered as bond length or bond distance. Thus bond length may also be defined as the internuclear distance when the maximum possible overlap of concerned atomic orbitals occurs. It is measured by techniques such as X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction and microwave spectroscopy. Measuring units: It is measured in Å or picometer: 1 pm = 10-12 m, 100 pm = 1 Å = 10-10 m. It is observed that its measurements may vary in accuracy but similar bonds have fairly constant lengths in different molecules, variation generally being less than 1%. In most of the compounds, the C-C single bond length is very close to 1.54 Å. For example in ethane molecule the C-C bond length is 1.54 Å and in ethyl chloride (C2H5Cl) the C-C bond length is 1.55 Å. One half of the bond length between nuclei of two similar atoms joined by single covalent bond is called the covalent radius of that atom. For example, the covalent radius of Carbon is 0.77 Å i.e., half of the C-C bond length which is 1.54 Å. The covalent-radii of other atoms are given in the following table:

Table: Covalent-radii of some atoms.
Atom Covalent-radius Å Atom Covalent-radius Å
H 0.37 C 0.77
F 0.72 N 0.75
Cl 0.99 O 0.73
Br 1.14 S 1.04
I 1.33

The covalent-radii can be used to calculate the bond length between two unlike atoms, which in some cases, is equal to the sum of the covalent radii of the two bonded atoms. For example, C-Cl bond length in CH3Cl is 1.76 Å, which is exactly the sum of the covalent radius of carbon (0.77 Å) and chlorine (0.99 Å). However, in most cases, the length of a covalent bond between two unlike atoms is markedly shorter than the sum of the two covalent radii. For example, the covalent radii of C and N add up to 1.52 Å whereas the observed C-N bond length (CH3NH2) is 1.47 Å. Similarly, the observed C-O bond length (CH3OH) is 1.43 Å although the sum of the covalent radii of carbon and oxygen is 1.50 Å.

Table: Bond lengths of some Covalent Bonds
Covalent Bond Bond Length (Å)
C-C 1.54
C=C 1.34
C≡C 1.20
C-N 1.47
C=N 1.28
C≡N 1.16
C-O 1.43
C=O 1.23
C≡O 1.13
C-F 1.42
C-Cl 1.77
C-Br 1.83
C-I 2.13
N-N 1.45
N=N 1.25
N≡N 1.10
O-O 1.48
O=O 1.21
O-H 0.96
N-H 1.01

Bond length is also affected by the nature of hybridization of the bonded atoms as shown in the following table:
Table: Effect of Hybridization on the Bond Length
Hybridization of C-atom Bond Length (Å)
C-H C-O C-N
sp3 1.11 (methane) 1.41 (ethanol) 1.47 (methylamine)
sp2 1.10 (ethylene) 1.34 (formic acid) 1.36 (formamide)
sp 1.08 (acetylene)

It can be noticed that the bonds are shortened by increasing "s" character. This is because the hybrid orbital with increased "s" character is held more tightly by the nucleus. A double bond between two atoms is shorter than a single bond between the same two atoms and a triple bond is shorter than the double bond as shown in the following table:
Table: Single, Double and Triple Bond Lengths.
Bond Length (Å)
Single bond Double bond Triple bond
C-C 1.54 1.34 1.20
C-N 1.47 1.28 1.16
C-O 1.43 1.23 1.13
N-N 1.45 1.25 1.10
O-O 1.48 1.21 --

The shrinkage of the multiple bonds is due to the presence of extra π electrons (two in the case of double bond and four in the case of triple bond) between the two nuclei, which exert extra attraction on both the nuclei bringing them closer to each other.

DIPOLE MOMENT (MEASURE OF POLARITY OF MOLECULES)
The polarity of a molecule can be expressed in terms of dipole moment. It is a product of the charge (positive or negative) and the distance between the charges. If q is the magnitude of charge at each end of dipole and r is the distance between them, then dipole moment represented as μ is given by μ = q x r. The SI unit of dipole moment is Coulomb-meter (C.m) but most common units used is Debye (D). 1 D = 3.336 x 10-30 C.m. A symmetrical molecule like CO2 has zero dipole moment, so it is non polar. But chloroform (CHCl3) has a dipole moment of 1.2 D, so it is polar. The measurement of dipole moment also finds applications in stereochemistry. For example dipole moments of isomer 1,2-dichloroethene have been calculated are given below: Trans = 0 D; Cis = 1.89 D. By knowing the dipole moment of the given sample of 1,2-dichloroethene, one can predict whether it is Cis or trans isomer. The dipole moment helps to calculate the percentage ionic character in a bond. For example, observed dipole moment of HF is 1.90 D. Find the percentage ionic character in HF bond. The distance between the charges is 0.917 x 10-10 m. Unit positive charge = +1.6022 x 10-19 C. Suppose that HF molecule is 100% ionic. It means that H has full positive charge and F has full negative charge. To calculate their dipole moments multiply the bond length with the charges of electron or proton i.e., 1.6022 x 10-19. This dipole moment is called theoretical dipole moment. μ theoretical = (1.6022 x 10-19 C) (0.917 x 10-10 m) = 1.469 x 10-29 C.m. Since 1 D = 3.336 x 10-30 C.m. So μ theoretical = (1.469 x 10-29 C.m) / (3.336 x 10-30 C.m/D) = 4.4 D. Actual dipole moment as it is observed, μ actual = 1.90 D. % ionic character = (1.90 D / 4.4 D) x 100 = 43.2%. Thus H-F bond is 43% ionic and 57% covalent. The bond is predominantly covalent, because the ionic character is less than 50%.

EFFECT OF BONDING ON THE PROPERTIES OF COMPOUNDS
Solubility of Ionic Compounds: Ionic compounds are soluble in water but insoluble in non-aqueous solvents. When a crystal of ionic compound is placed in water, the polar water molecules surround each cation and anion from the crystal lattice by their electrostatic attraction. The ions are detached from the crystal lattice by hydration. This happens when the hydration energy is equal to or greater than lattice energy. The energy released in hydration is used to overcome the repulsion between the ions are freed from their positions in the crystal. Ionic compounds do not dissolve in water because the attraction of water molecules is not enough to overcome the attraction between the ions. Their lattice energy dominates over hydration energy. For the same reasons, the non-polar solvents benzene and carbon tetrachloride cannot dissolve in ionic compounds.

Solubility of Covalent Compounds: Covalent compounds dissolve in non-polar organic solvents such as benzene, ether, chloroform and carbon tetrachloride. Covalent compounds are insoluble in water. However, some of them dissolve in water. The attractive forces of solvent molecules in non-polar solvents are enough for separating the intermolecular forces of attraction in covalent compounds. Hence covalent compounds dissolve easily in non-polar organic solvents. Solubility of covalent compounds in water depends on their ability to form hydrogen bonds with water molecules. Many organic compounds containing oxygen or nitrogen like carboxylic acids, alcohols and amines are soluble in water due to hydrogen bonding.

Directional nature of Ionic Bonds: Ionic bonds are non-directional and rigid in nature. They do not show the phenomenon of isomerism.

Directional Nature of Covalent Bonds: Covalent bonds are of directional nature. They show the phenomenon of isomerism. Due to non-rigid and directional nature of the covalent bond, covalent compounds have different arrangements of atoms in space. Hence many covalent compounds show the phenomenon of isomerism. For example C2H6O show structural isomerism: CH3-O-CH3 (Dimethyl Ether) and CH3-CH2-OH (Ethyl alcohol).

Electrical Conductivity: Ionic compounds conduct electricity in the form of ions in an aqueous solution. The ionic compounds have already separated ions which act as carriers of charge, so the reaction is so rapid because no bond formation or bond breaking is involved.

Electrical Conductivity of Covalent Compounds: Covalent compounds do not conduct electricity because they do not have free ions in solution. They are neutral molecules. The bonds are generally much slower to react as they involve both bond breaking and bond making. The molecules undergo a chemical change as a whole. It is necessary to break the covalent bonds. Covalent compounds react in a variety of ways. The reactivity of covalent compounds depends upon the way a reaction proceeds and the product obtained at the end of a reaction.

Density: The strong electrostatic force of attraction existing between the cations and anions in an ionic compound packs these ions very close to one another. This decreases the volume of the crystal and consequently the ionic crystals have high density.

Types of Solids: A Solid is a structural unit of atoms, molecules or ions, which are held together strongly enough to give a rigid structure. Four types of solids exist namely Molecular solids: Consists of atoms or molecules held together by inter-molecular forces. Solid water (ice) and solid CO2 (dry ice) are common examples. Metallic Solids: Consists of atoms held together by metallic bonding, examples silver, copper and gold. Ionic Solids: Consists of cations and anions held together by virtue of electrostatic attraction of the opposite charges. Examples are NaCl and CaCl2. Covalent Network Solids: Consists of atoms held together in large network or chains by covalent bonds. Diamond, graphite are typical examples.

Difference between Covalent Network Solids and Molecular Network Solids (Metallic Solids)
In Metallic Solids: Metallic solids consist of infinite arrays of bonded atoms; each cation in a metal has a coordination number sometimes four or six, but more often eight or twelve they are good conductor of heat and electricity. In Covalent Network Solids: Consist of infinite arrays of bonded atoms; no individual molecules can be distinguished (each piece of network solid may be considered a giant, covalently bonded molecule). They are non conductor of heat and electricity. Strong covalent bonds throughout these solids, give them great strength and high melting points.